hi everyone so today we are going to be
continuing our Zero to Hero series and
in particular today we are going to
reproduce the gpt2 model the 124 million
version of it so when openi released
gpt2 this was 2019 and they released it
with this blog post on top of that they
released this paper and on top of that
they released this code on GitHub so
open a/
gpt2 now when we talk about reproducing
gpt2 we have to be careful because in
particular in this video we're going to
be reproducing the 124 million parameter
model so the thing to realize is that
there's always a miniseries when these
are releases are made so there are the
gpt2 miniseries made up of models at
different sizes and usually the biggest
model is called the
gpt2 but basically the reason we do that
is because you can put the model sizes
on the x-axis of plots like this and on
the Y AIS you put a lot of uh Downstream
metrics that you're interested in like
translation summarization question
answering and so on and you can chart
out these scaling laws so basically as
the model size increases you're getting
better and better at Downstream metrics
and so in particular for
gpt2 if we scroll down in paper there
are four models in the gpt2 miniseries
starting at 124 million all the way up
to 1558 million now the reason my
numbers the way I say them disagree with
this table is that this table is wrong
if you actually go to the uh gpt2 uh
GitHub repo they sort of say that um
there was an error in how they added up
the parameters but basically this is the
124 million parameter model Etc so the
124 million parameter had 12 layers in
the Transformer and it had 768 channels
in the Transformer 768 dimensions and
I'm going to be assuming some
familiarity with what these terms mean
because I covered all of this in my
previous video let's build gpt2 uh let's
build GPT from scratch so I covered that
in the previous video in this playlist
now if we do everything correctly and
everything works out well by the end of
this video we're going to see something
like this where we're looking at the
validation loss which basically um
measures how good we are at predicting
the next token in a sequence on some
validation data that the model has not
seen during training and we see that we
go from doing that task not very well
because we're initializing from scratch
all the way to doing that task quite
well um by the end of the training and
hopefully we're going to beat the gpt2
uh 124 M model
now previously when they were working on
this this is already 5 years ago so this
was probably a fairly complicated
optimization at the time and the gpus
and the compute was a lot smaller today
you can reproduce this model in roughly
an hour or probably less even and it
will cost you about 10 bucks if you want
to do this on the cloud uh Cloud Compu a
sort of computer that you can all rent
and if you pay $10 for that computer you
wait about an hour or less you can
actually achieve a model that is as good
as this model that open ey released and
uh one more thing to mention is unlike
many other models open ey did release
the weights for gpt2 so those weights
are all available in this repository but
the gpt2 paper is not always as good
with all of the details of training so
in addition to the gpt2 paper we're
going to be referencing the gpt3 paper
which is a lot more Concrete in a lot of
the hyp parameters and optimization
settings and so on um and it's not a
huge departure in the architecture from
the GPT 2 uh version of the model so
we're going to be referencing both gpt2
and gpt3 as we try to reproduce gpt2 124
M uh so let's go so the first thing I
would like to do is actually start at
the end or at the Target so in other
words let's load the GPT to 124 M model
as it was released by openi and maybe
take it for a spin let's sample some
tokens from it now the issue with that
is when you go into the code base of
gpt2 and you go into the source and you
click in on the model. pi you'll realize
that actually this is using tensorflow
so the original gpt2 code here was
written in tensor flow which is
um you know not let's just say not used
as much anymore um so we'd like to use
pytorch uh because it's a lot friendlier
easier and I just personally like a lot
more the problem with that is the
initial code is intenser flow we'd like
to use pytorch so instead uh to get the
target we're going to use the hugging
face Transformers um code which I like a
lot more so when you go into the
Transformers source Transformers models
gpt2 modeling gpt2 Pi you will see that
they have the gpt2 implementation of
that Transformer here in this
file um and it's like medium readable
but not fully readable um but what it
does is it did all the work of
converting all those weights uh from
tensor flow to pytorch Friendly and so
it's much easier to load and work with
so in particular we can look at the
gpt2 um model here and we can load it
using hugging face Transformers so
swinging over this is what that looks
like from Transformers import the DP GT2
LM head model and then from pre-train
gpt2 uh now one awkward thing about this
is that when you do gpt2 as the model
that we're loading this actually is the
124 million parameter model if you want
the actual the gpt2 the 1.5 billion then
you actually want to do- XL so this is
the 12 4 M our Target now what we're
doing is when we actually get this we're
initializing the uh pytorch NN module as
defined here in this
class from it I want to get just the
state dict which is just a raw tensors
so we just have um the tensors of that
file and by the way here this is a
jupyter notebook uh but this is jupyter
notebook running inside vs code uh so I
like to work with it all in a single
sort of interface so I like to use vs
code so this is the jupyter notebook
extension inside the es
code so when we get the state dick this
is just a dict so we can print the key
and the value which is the tensor and
let's just look at the shapes so these
are sort of
the uh different parameters inside the
gbt2 model and their shape so the W
weight for token
embedding is of size
50257 by 768 where this is coming from
is that we have
50257 tokens in the gpt2 vocabulary um
and the tokens by the way these are
exactly the tokens that we spoken about
in the previous video on my tokenization
Series so the previous videos just
before this I go into a ton of detail on
tokenization gpt2 tokenizer happens to
have this many tokens for each
token we have a 768 dimensional
embedding that is the distributed
representation that stands in for that
token so each token is a little string
piece and then the 768 numbers are the
vector that represents that
token and so this is just our lookup
table for tokens and then here we have
the lookup table for the positions so
because gbt2 has a maximum sequence
length of
1024 we have up to 1,24 positions that
each token can be attending to in the
past and every one of those positions in
gpd2 has a fixed Vector of
768 that is learned by
optimization um and so this is the
position embedding and the token
embedding um and then everything here is
just the other weights and biases and
everything else of this
Transformer so when you just take for
example the positional embeddings and
flatten it out and take just the 20
elements you can see that these are just
the parameters these are weights floats
just we can take and we can plot them so
these are the position embeddings and we
get something like this and you can see
that this has structure and it has
structure because what we what we have
here really is every Row in this
visualization is a different position a
fixed absolute position in um the range
from 0 to
1024 and each row here is the
representation of that position and so
it has structure because these
positional embeddings end up learning
these sinusoids and cosiness um that
sort of like represent each of these
positions and uh each row here stands in
for that position and is processed by
the Transformer to recover all the
relative positions and uh sort of
realize which token is where and um
attend to them depending on their
position not just their
content so when we actually just look
into an individual column inside these
and I just grabbed three random columns
you'll see that for example here we are
focusing on every every single um
Channel and we're looking
at what that channel is doing as a
function of uh position from one from Z
to
really and we can see that some of these
channels basically like respond more or
less to different parts of the position
Spectrum so this green channel uh really
likes to fire for everything after 200
uh up to 800 but not less a lot less and
has a sharp drop off here near zero so
who knows what these embeddings are
doing and why they are the way they are
you can tell for example that because
they're a bit more Jagged and they're
kind of noisy you can tell that this
model was not fully trained and the more
trained this model was the more you
would expect to smooth this out and so
this is telling you that this is a
little bit of an undertrained model um
but in principle actually these curves
don't even have to be smooth this should
just be totally random noise and in fact
in the beginning of the optimization it
is complete random noise because this
position embedding table is initialized
completely at random so in the beginning
you have jaggedness and the fact that
you end up with something smooth is
already kind of impressive um that that
just falls out of the optimization
because in principle you shouldn't even
be able to get any single graph out of
this that makes sense but we actually
get something that looks a little bit
noisy but for the most part looks
sinusoidal like um in the original
Transformer um in the original
Transformer paper the attention is all
you need paper the positional embeddings
are actually initialized and fixed if I
remember correctly to sinusoids and
cosiness of uh different frequencies and
that's the positional coding and it's
fixed but in gpt2 these are just
parameters and they're trained from
scratch just like any other parameter uh
and that seems to work about as well and
so what they do is they kind of like
recover these sinusoidal like features
during the
optimization we can also look at any of
the other matrices here so here I took
the first layer of the
Transformer and looking at like one of
its weights and just the first block of
300 by 300 and you see some structure
but like again like who knows what any
of this is if you're into mechanistic
interpretability you might get a real
kick out of trying to figure out like
what is going on what is this structure
and what does this all mean but we're
not going to be doing that in this video
but we definitely see that there's some
interesting structure and that's kind of
cool what we're mostly interested in is
we've loaded the weights of this model
that was released by open Ai and now
using the hogging face Transformers we
can not just get all the raw weights but
we can also get the um what they call
Pipeline and sample from it so this is
the prefix hello I'm a language model
comma and then we're sampling uh 30
tokens and we getting five sequences and
I ran this and this is what it produced
um hell language
model but what I'm really doing is
making a human readable document there
are other languages but those are dot
dot dot so you can read through these if
you like but basically these are five
different completions of the same prefix
from this uh gbt
2124m now uh if I go here I took this
example from here and sadly even though
we are fixing the seed we are getting
different Generations from the snippet
than what they got so presumably the
code changed um but what we see though
at this stage that's important is that
we are getting coherent text so we've
loaded the model successfully we can
look at all its parameters and the keys
tell us where in the model these come
from and we want to actually write our
own gpt2 class so that we have full
understanding of what's happening there
we don't want to be working with
something like uh the modeling gpt2 Pi
because it's just too complicated we
want to write this from scratch
ourselves so we're going to be
implementing the GPT model here in
parallel and as our first task let's
load the gpt2 124 M into the class that
we're going to develop here from scratch
that's going to give us confidence that
we can load the open ey model and
therefore there's a setting of Weights
that exactly is the 124 model but then
of course what we're going to do is
we're going to initialize the model from
scratch instead and try try to train it
ourselves um on a bunch of documents
that we're going to get and we're going
to try to surpass that model so we're
going to get different weights and
everything's going to look different
hopefully better even um
but uh we're going to have a lot of
confidence that because we can load the
openi model we are in the same model
family and model class and we just have
to ReDiscover a good setting of the
weights uh but from scratch so let's now
write the gbt2 model and let's load the
weights and make sure that we can also
generate text that looks coherent okay
so let's now swing over to the attention
is all un need paper that started
everything and let's scroll over to the
model architecture the original
Transformer now remember that gpt2 is
slightly modified from the or or
Transformer in particular we do not have
uh the encoder gpt2 is a decoder only
Transformer as we call it so this entire
encoder here is missing in addition to
that this cross attention here that was
using that encoder is also missing so we
delete this entire part everything else
stays almost the same but there are some
differences that we're going to uh sort
of look at here so there are two main
differences when we go to the gb2 page
under 2.3 model we notice that first
there's a reshuffling of the layer Norms
so they change place and second an
additional layer normalization was added
here to the final self detention block
so basically all the layer Norms here
instead of being after the MLP or after
the attention they SN before it and an
additional layer Norm gets added here
right before the final
classifier so now let's Implement some
of the first sort of skeleton NN module
modules here in our GPT NN module and in
particular we're going to try to match
up this schema here that is used by
hugging face Transformers because that
will make it much easier to load these
weights from this state dict so we want
something that reflects uh this schema
here so here's what I came up with
um basically we see that the main
container here that has all the modules
is called Transformer so I'm reflecting
that with an NN module dict and this is
basically a module that allows you to
index into the subm modules using keys
just like a dictionary uh
strings within it we have the weights of
the token embeddings WT and that's an N
embedding and the weights of the
position embeddings which is also just
an N embedding and if you remember n
embedding is really just a fancy little
wrapper module around just a single um
single array of numbers a single uh
block of numbers just like this it's a
single tensor and an embedding is a
glorified um wrapper around a tensor
that allows you to access its elements
uh by indexing into the
rows now in addition to that we see here
that we have a h and then there's a this
is index using numbers instead of
indexed using strings so there's a h. 0
1 2 Etc all the way up till h. 11 and
that's because there are 12 layers here
in this Transformer so to reflect that
I'm creating also an H I think that
probably stands for hidden and instead
of a module dict this is a model list so
we can index it using integers exactly
as we see here 01 2 Etc and the modular
list has a n layer blocks and the blocks
are yet to be defined in a module in a
bit in addition to that following the
gpt2 paper we have we need an additional
final layer Norm that we're going to put
in there and then we have the final
classifier uh the language model head
which um projects from 768 the number of
embedding dimensions in this GPT all the
way to the vocab size which is
50257 and gpt2 uses no bias for this
final uh sort of projection so this is
the skeleton and you can see that it
reflects this so the wte is the token
embeddings here it's called output
embedding but it's really the token
embeddings the PE is the positional
codings uh those two pieces of
information as we saw previously are
going to add and then go into the
Transformer the H is the all the blocks
in Gray and the LNF is this new layer
that gets added here by the gpt2 model
and LM head is this linear part here so
that's the skeleton of the gpt2 we now
have to implement the block okay so
let's now recurse to the block itself so
we want to define the block um so I'll
start putting them here so the block I
like to write out like
this uh these are some of the
initializations and then this is the
actual forward pass of what this block
computes and notice here that there's a
change from the Transformer again that
is mentioned in the gpt2 paper so here
the layer normalizations are after the
application of attention or feed forward
in addition to that note that the
normalizations are inside the residual
stream you see how feed forward is
applied and this arrow goes through and
through the normalization so that means
that your residual pathway has
normalizations inside them and this is
not very good or desirable uh you
actually prefer to have a single uh
clean residual stream all the way from
supervision all the way down to the
inputs the tokens and this is very
desirable and nice because the gradients
that flow from the top if you remember
from your microad addition just
distributes gradients during the
backwards state to both of its branches
equally so addition is a branch in the
gradients and so that means that the
gradients from the top flows straight to
the inputs the tokens through the
residual Pathways unchanged but then in
addition to that the gradient also flows
through the blocks and the blocks you
know contribute their own contribution
over time and kick in and change the
optimization over time but basically
clean residual pathway is desirable from
an optimization perspective and then the
this is the pre-normalization version
where you see that RX first goes through
the layer normalization and then the
attention and then goes uh back out to
go to the L ration number two and the
multia perceptron sometimes also
referred to as a feed forward Network or
an FFN and then that goes into the
residual stream again and the one more
thing that is kind of interesting to
note is that recall that attention is a
communication operation it is where all
the tokens and there's 1,24 tokens lined
up in a sequence and this is where the
tokens communicate this is where they
exchange information so attention is a
um aggregation function it's a pooling
function it's a weighted sum function it
is a reduce operation whereas MLP this
uh MLP here happens at every single
token individually there's no
information being collected or exchanged
between the tokens so the attention is
the reduce and the MLP is the map and
what you end up with is that the
Transformer just ends up just being a
repeated application of map produce if
you want to think about it that way so
um this is where they communicate and
this is where they think individually
about the information that they gathered
and every one of these blocks uh
iteratively refines the um
representation is at the residual stream
so this is our block um slightly
modified from this picture Okay so let's
now move on to the MLP so the MLP block
uh I implemented as follows
it is relatively straightforward we
basically have two linear projections
here that are sandwiched in between the
G
nonlinearity so nn. G approximate is 10h
now when we swing on uh swing over to
the Pyro documentation this is n.g and
it has this format and it has two
versions the original version of G which
we'll step into into in a bit and the
approximate version of Galo which we can
request using
10 so as you can see just as a preview
here G is a basically like a reu except
there's no flat exactly Flat Tail here
at exactly zero but otherwise it looks
very much like a slightly smoother reu
it comes from this paper here Gan error
linear units and uh you can step through
this paper and there's some mathematical
calac reasoning that leads to an
interpretation that leads to the
specific formulation it has to do with
stochastic radial risers and the
expectation of a modification to
Adaptive dropout so you can read through
all of that if you'd like here and
there's a little bit of history as to
why there is an an approximate version
of G and that comes from this issue here
as far as I can tell and in this issue
Daniel Hendrix mentions that at the time
when they developed this nonlinearity
the Earth function which you need to
evaluate the exact G was very slow in
tensor flow so they ended up basically
developing this approximation and this
approximation that then ended up being
picked up by Bert and by GP P2 Etc but
today there's no real good reason to use
the approximate version you'd prefer to
just use the exact version um because I
my expectation is that there's no big
difference anymore and this is kind of
like a historical um kind of Quirk um
but we are trying to reproduce gpt2
exactly and gpt2 used the 10h
approximate version so we prefer to
stick with
that um now one other reason to actually
just intuitively use G instead of veru
is previously in the in videos in the
past we've spoken about the dead reu
neuron problem where in this tale of a
reu if it's exactly flat at zero any
activations that fall there will get
exactly zero gradient there's no change
there's no adaptation there's no
development of the network if any of
these activations end in this flat
region but the G always contributes a
local gradient and so there's always
going to be a change always going to be
an adaptation and sort of smoothing it
out ends up empirically working better
in practice as demonstrated in this
paper and also as demonstrated by it
being picked up by the bird paper gbt2
paper and so on so for that reason we
adopt this nonlinearity uh here in the
10 in the gbt2 reproduction now in more
modern networks also like llama 3 and so
on this nonlinearity also further
changes uh to swiglo and other variants
like that uh but for gpt2 they Ed this
approximate
G okay and finally we have the attention
operation so let me paste in my
attention
so I know this is a lot so I'm going to
go through this a bit quickly a bit
slowly but not too slowly because we
have covered this in the previous video
and I would just point you there um so
this is the attention operation now in
the previous video you will remember
this is not just attention this is um
multi-headed attention right and so in
the previous video we had this
multi-headed attention module and this
implementation made it obvious that
these heads are not actually that
complicated uh there's basically
in parallel inside every attention block
there's multiple heads and they're all
functioning in parallel and uh their
outputs are just being concatenated and
that becomes the output of the
multi-headed attention so the heads are
just kind of like parallel streams and
their outputs get
concatenated and so it was very simple
and made the head be kind of like U
fairly straightforward in terms of its
implementation what happens here is that
instead of having two separate modules
and indeed many more modules that get
concatenated all of that is just put
into a single uh self attention uh
module and instead I'm being very
careful and doing a bunch of transpose
split um tensor gymnastics to make this
very efficient in pych but fundamentally
and algorithmically nothing is different
from the implementation we saw
before um in this uh give
repository so to remind you very briefly
and I don't want to go in this uh into
this in too many in too much time but we
have these tokens lined up in a sequence
and there's 1,20 of them and then each
token at this stage of the attention
emits three vectors the query key and
the value and first what happens here um
is that the queries and the keys have to
multiply each other to get sort of the
attention um amount like how interesting
they find each other so they have to
interact multiplicatively so what we're
doing here is we're calculating the qkv
we splitting it and then there's a bunch
of gymnastics as I mentioned here and
the way this works is that we're
basically making the number of heads and
H into a batch Dimension and so it's a
batch Dimension just like B so that in
these operations that follow pytorch
treats B and NH as batches and it
applies all the operations on all of
them in parallel in both the batch and
the
heads and the operations that get
applied are number one the queries and
the keys intera to give us her attention
this is the autoaggressive mask that
makes sure that the tokens only attend
to tokens before them and never to
tokens in the
future the softmax here normalizes the
attention so it sums to one always and
then recall from the previous video that
doing the attention Matrix multiply with
the values is basically a way to do a
weighted sum of the values of the tokens
that we found interesting at every
single token and then the final
transpose conf VI and view is just
reassembling all of that again and this
actually performs the concatenation
operation so you can step through this
uh slowly if you'd like um but it is
equivalent mathematically to our
previous implementation is just more
efficient in P torch so that's why I
chose this implementation
instead now in addition to that I'm
being careful with how I name my
variables so for example cattin is the
same as seaten and so actually our keys
should basically exactly follow the
schema of the hugging face train
Transformers code and that will make it
very easy for us to now Port over all
the weights from exactly this sort of
naming conventions because all of our
variables are named the same thing but
um at this point we have finished the
gpt2 implementation and what that allows
us to do is we don't have to basically
use uh this file from hugging face which
is fairly long
um this
is uh 2,000 lines of code um instead we
just have a less than 100 lines of code
and this is the complete uh gpd2
implementation so at this stage we
should just be able to take over all the
weights set them and then do generation
so let's see what that looks like okay
so here I've also changed the GPT config
so that the numbers here the H
parameters agree with the gpt2 124 M
model so the maximum sequence length
which I call block size here is 124 the
number of tokens is 50250 257 which if
you watch my tokenizer video know that
this is 50,000 m merges BP merges 256
bite tokens the leaves of the BP tree
and one special end of text token that
delimits different documents and can
start generation as well and there are
12 layers there are 12 heads in the
attention and the dimension of the
Transformers was
768 so here's how we can now load the
parameters from hugging face to uh our
code here and initialize the GPT class
with those parameters so let me just
copy paste a bunch of code
here and I'm not going to go through
this code too slow too quickly too
slowly because um honestly it's not that
interesting it's not that exciting we're
just loading the weights so it's kind of
dry but as I mentioned there are four
models in this miniseries of gpt2 this
is some of the Jupiter code um code that
we had here on the right I'm just pting
it over these are the hyper parameters
of the gpt2 models uh we're creating the
config object and creating our own model
and then what's Happening Here is we're
creating the state dict both for our
model and for the hugging face
model um and then what we're doing here
is we're going over the hugging face
model keys and we're copying over those
tensors and in the process we are kind
of ignoring a few of the buffers they're
not parameters they're buffers so for
example attention dobias uh that's just
used for the autoaggressive mask and so
we are ignoring some of those masks and
uh that's it and then then one
additional kind of annoyance is that
this comes from the tensorflow repo and
I'm not sure how this is a little bit
annoying but some of the weights are
transposed from what pytorch would want
and so manually I hardcoded the weights
that should be transposed and then we
transpose them if that is so and then we
return this model so the from
pre-trained is a
Constructor or class method in Python
that Returns the GPT object if we just
give it the model type which in our case
is gpt2 the smallest model that we're
interested in so this is the code and
this is how you would use it and um we
can pop open the terminal here in vs
code and we can python train gbt2 pi and
fingers
crossed okay so we didn't crash and so
we can load the weights and the biases
and everything else into our Ann module
but now let's also get additional
confidence that this is working and
let's try to actually generate from this
model okay now before we can actually
generate from this model we have to be
able to forward it we didn't actually
write that code yet so here's the
forward
function so the input to the forward is
going to be our indices our tokens uh
token indices and they are always of
shape B BYT and so we have batch
dimension of B and then we have the time
dimension of up to T and the T can't be
more than the block size the block size
is is the maximum sequence length so B
BYT indices arranged is sort of like a
two-dimensional layout and remember that
basically every single row of this is of
size up to uh block size and this is T
tokens that are in a sequence and then
we have B independent sequences stacked
up in a batch so that this is
efficient now here we are forwarding the
position embeddings and the token
embeddings and this code should be very
recognizable from the previous lecture
so um we basically use uh a range which
is kind of like a version of range but
for pytorch uh and we're iterating from
Z to T and creating this uh positions uh
sort of uh indices
um and then we are making sure that
they're in the same device as idx
because we're not going to be training
on only CPU that's going to be too
inefficient we want to be training on
GPU and that's going to come in in a
bit uh then we have the position
embeddings and the token embeddings and
the addition operation of those two now
notice that the position embed are going
to be identical for every single row of
uh of input and so there's broadcasting
hidden inside this plus where we have to
create an additional Dimension here and
then these two add up because the same
position embeddings apply at every
single row of our example stacked up in
a batch then we forward the Transformer
blocks and finally the last layer norm
and the LM head so what comes out after
forward is the logits and if the input
was B BYT indices then at every single B
by T we will calculate the uh logits for
what token comes next in the sequence so
what is the token B t+1 the one on the
right of this token and B app size here
is the number of possible tokens and so
therefore this is the tensor that we're
going to obtain and these low jits are
just a softmax away from becoming
probabilities so this is the forward
pass of the network and now we can get
load and so we're going to be able to
generate from the model
imminently okay so now we're going to
try to set up the identical thing on the
left here that matches hug and face on
the right so here we've sampled from the
pipeline and we sampled five times up to
30 tokens with the prefix of hello I'm a
language model and these are the
completions that we achieved so we're
going to try to replicate that on the
left here so number turn sequences is
five max length is 30 so the first thing
we do of course is we initialize our
model then we put it into evaluation
mode now this is a good practice to put
the model into eval when you're not
going to be training it you're just
going to be using it and I don't
actually know if this is doing anything
right now for the following reason our
model up above here contains no modules
or layers that actually have a different
uh Behavior at training or evaluation
time so for example Dropout batch norm
and a bunch of other layers have this
kind of behavior but all of these layers
that we've used here should be identical
in both training and evaluation time um
so so potentially model that eval does
nothing but then I'm not actually sure
if this is the case and maybe pytorch
internals uh do some clever things
depending on the evaluation mode uh
inside here the next thing we're doing
here is we are moving the entire model
to Cuda so we're moving this all of the
tensors to GPU so I'm sshed here to a
cloud box and I have a bunch of gpus on
this box and here I'm moving the entire
model and all of its members and all of
its tensors and everything like that
everything gets shipped off to basically
a whole separate computer that is
sitting on the GPU and the GPU is
connected to the uh CPU and they can
communicate but it's basically a whole
separate computer with its own computer
architecture and it's really well
catered to parallel processing tasks
like those of running neural networks so
I'm doing this so that the model lives
on the GPU a whole separate computer and
it's just going to make our code a lot
more efficient because all of this stuff
runs a lot more efficiently on the
gpus so that's the model
itself now uh the next thing we want to
do is we want to start with this as the
prefix when we do the generation so
let's actually create those prefix
tokens so here's the code that I've
written we're going to import the tich
token library from open Ai and we're
going to get the gpt2 encoding so that's
the tokenizer for gpt2 and then we're
going to encode this string and get a
list of integers which are the tokens uh
now these integers here should actually
be fairly straightforward because we can
just copy paste this string and we can
sort of inspect what it is in tick
tokenizer so just pasting that in these
are the tokens that are going to come
out so this list of integers is what we
expect tokens to become and as you
recall if you saw my video of course all
the tokens they're just little string
chunks right so these are this is the
chunc of this string into gpt2
tokens so once we have those tokens it's
a list of integers we can create a torch
tensor out of it in this case it's eight
tokens and then we're going to replicate
these eight tokens for five times to get
five rows of eight tokens and that is
our initial um input X as I call it here
and it lives on the GPU as well so X now
is this idx that we can put into forward
to get our logits so that we know what
comes as the sixth token
uh sorry as the ninth token in every one
of these five rows okay and we are now
ready to generate so let me paste in one
more code block
here um so what's happening here in this
code block is we have this x which is of
size B BYT right so batch by time and
we're going to be in every iteration of
this loop we're going to be adding a
column of new indices into each one of
these rows right and so these are the
new indices and we're appending them to
the the sequence as we're sampling so
with each Loop iteration we get one more
column into X and all of the operations
happen in the context manager of torch.
nograd this is just telling pytorch that
we're not going to be calling that
backward on any of this so it doesn't
have to cach all the intermediate
tensors it's not going to have to
prepare in any way for a potential
backward later and this saves a lot of
space and also possibly uh some time so
we get our low jits we get the loow jits
at only the last location we throw away
all the other low jits uh we don't need
them we only care about the last columns
low jits so this is being wasteful uh
but uh this is just kind of like an
inefficient implementation of
sampling um so it's correct but
inefficient so we get the last column of
loow jits pass it through soft Max to
get our probabilities then here I'm
doing top case sampling of 50 and I'm
doing that because this is the hugging
face default so just looking at the
hugging face docks here of a pipeline um
there's a bunch of
quarks that go into hugging face and I
mean it's it's kind of a lot honestly
but I guess the important one that I
noticed is that they're using top K by
default which is 50 and what that does
is that uh so that's being used here as
well and what that does is basically we
want to take our probabilities and we
only want to keep the top 50
probabilities and anything that is lower
than the 50th probability uh we just
clamp to zero and renormalize and so
that way we are never sampling very rare
tokens uh the tokens we're going to be
sampling are always in the top 50 of
most likely tokens and this helps keep
the model kind of on track and it
doesn't blabber on and it doesn't get
lost and doesn't go off the rails as
easily uh and it kind of like um sticks
in the vicinity of likely tokens a lot
better so this is the way to do it in
pytorch and you can step through it if
you like I don't think it's super
insightful so I'll speed through it but
roughly speaking we get this new column
of of tokens we append them on x and
basically The Columns of X grow until
this y Loop gets tripped up and then
finally we have an entire X of size um 5
by 30 in this case in this example and
we can just basically print all those
individual rows so I'm getting all the
rows I'm getting all the tokens that
were sampled and I'm using the decode
function from Tik tokenizer to get back
the string which we can print and so
terminal new terminal
and let me python train
gpt2 okay so these are the generations
that we're getting hello I'm a language
model not a
program um new line new line Etc hello
I'm a language model and one of the main
things that bothers me when they create
languages is how easy it becomes to
create something that I me so this will
just like blabber on right in all these
cases now one thing you will notice is
that these Generations are not the
generations of hugging face here and I
can't find the discrepancy to be honest
and I didn't fully go through all these
options but probably there's something
else hiding in on addition to the top P
so I'm not able to match it up but just
for correctness um down here Below in
the juper notebook and using the hugging
face model so this is the hugging face
model here I was I replicated the code
and if I do this and I run that then I
am getting the same results so basically
the model internals are not wrong it's
just I'm not 100% sure what the pipeline
does in hugging face and that's why
we're not able to match them up but
otherwise the code is correct and we've
loaded all the um tensors correctly so
we're initializing the model correctly
and everything here works so long story
short uh We've Port it all the weights
we initialize the gpt2 this is the exact
opening gpt2 and it can generate
sequences and they look sensible and now
here of course we're initializing with
gbt2 model weights but now we want to
initialize from scratch from random
numbers and we want to actually train a
model that will give us sequences as
good as or better than these ones in
quality and so that's what we turn to
next so it turns out that using the
random model is actually fairly
straightforward because pytorch already
initializes our model randomly and by
default so when we create the GPT model
and the Constructor this is all um all
of these layers and modules have random
initializers that are there by default
so when these linear layers get created
and so on there's default Constructors
for example using the Javier
initialization that we saw in the past
uh to construct the weights of these
layers and so creating a random model
instead of a gpt2 model is actually
fairly straightforward and we would just
come here and instead we would create
model equals GPT and then we want to use
the default config GPT config and the
default config uses the 124 M parameters
so this is the random model
initialization and we can run
it and we should be able to get uh
results now the results here of course
are total garbage carbal and that's
because this is random model and so
we're just getting all these random
token string pieces chunked up totally
at random so that's what we have right
now uh now one more thing I wanted to
point out by the way is in case you do
not have Cuda available because you
don't have a GPU you can still follow
along with uh with what we're doing here
uh to some extent uh and probably not to
the very end because by the end we're
going to be using multiple gpus and
actually doing a serious training run uh
but for now you can actually follow
along decently okay uh so one thing that
I like to do in pytorch is I like to
autod detect the device that is
available to you so in particular you
could do that like this
so here we are trying to detect a device
to run on that has the highest compute
capability you can think about it that
way so by default we start with CPU
which of course is available everywhere
because every single computer will have
a CPU but then we can try to detect do
you have a GPU you so use a Cuda and
then if you don't have a Cuda uh do you
at least have MPS MPS is the back end
for Apple silicon so if you have a
Macbook that is fairly new you probably
have apple silicon on the inside and
then that has a GPU that is actually
fairly capable uh depending on which
MacBook you have and so you can use MPS
which will be potentially faster than
CPU and so we can print the device here
now once we have the device we can
actually use it in place of Puda so we
just swap it in and notice that here
when we call model on X if this x here
is on CPU instead of GPU then it will
work fine because here in the forward
which is where P to will come when we
create a pose we were careful to use the
device of idx to create this tensor as
well and so there won't be any mismatch
where one tensor is on CPU one is on GPU
and uh that you can't combine those but
here we are um carefully initializing on
the correct device as indicated by the
input to this model so this will autod
detect device for me this will be of
course
GPU so using device
Cuda uh but uh you can also run with um
as I mentioned another device and it's
not going to be too much slower so if I
override device here
oops if I override device equals
CPU
then we'll still print Cuda of course
but now we're actually using CPU one 2 3
4 5 6 okay about 6 seconds and actually
we're not using torch compile and stuff
like that which will speed up everything
a lot faster as well but you can follow
even on a CPU I think to a decent extent
um so that's note on that okay so I do
want to loop around eventually into what
it means to have different devices in
pytorch and what it is exactly that
pytorch does in the background for you
when you do something like module. 2
device or where you take a torch tensor
and do A2 device and what exactly
happens and how that works but for now
I'd like to get to training and I'd like
to start training the model and for now
let's just say the device makes code go
fast um and let's go into how we can
actually train the model so to train the
model we're going to need some data set
and for me the best debugging simplest
data set that I like to use is the tiny
Shakespeare data set um and it's
available at this URL so you can W get
it or you can just search tiny
Shakespeare data
set and so um I have in my file system
as just LS input.txt
so I already downloaded it and here I'm
reading the data set getting the first
1,000 characters and printing the first
now remember that gpt2 has uh roughly a
compression ratio the tokenizer has a
compression ratio of rly 3 to1 so th000
characters is roughly 300 tokens here uh
that will come out of this in the slice
that we're currently getting so this is
the first few uh
characters and uh if you want to get a
few more statistics on this we can do
work count on input.txt
so we can see that this is uh 40,000
lines about 200,000 words in this data
set and about 1 million bytes in this
file and knowing that this file is only
asky characters there's no crazy unic
code here as far as I know and so every
asky character is encoded with one bite
and so this is uh the same number
roughly a million characters inside this
data set so that's the data set size uh
by default very small and minimal data
set for debugging to get us off the
ground in order to tokenize this data
set we're going to get Tik token
encoding for gbt2 encode the data uh the
first um 1,000 characters and then I'm
only going to print the first 24 tokens
so these are the tokens as a list of
integers and if you can read gpt2 tokens
you will see that 198 here you'll
recognize that as the slashing character
so that is a new line and then here for
example we have two new lines so that's
198 twice here uh so this is just a
tokenization of the first 24 tokens so
what we want to do now is we want to
actually process these token sequences
and feed them into a Transformer and in
particular we want them we want to
rearrange these tokens into this idx
variable that we're going to be feeding
into the Transformer so we don't want a
single very long onedimensional sequence
we want an entire batch where each
sequence is up to uh is basically T
tokens and T cannot be larger than the
maximum sequence length and then we have
these t uh tlong uh sequences of tokens
and we have B independent examples of
sequences so how can we create a b BYT
tensor that we can feed into the forward
out of these onedimensional
sequences so here's my favorite way to
to achieve this uh so if we take torch
and then we create a tensor object out
of this list of integers and just the
first 24 tokens my favorite way to do
this is basically you do a do view of um
of uh for example 4x6 which multiply to
24 and so it's just a two-dimensional
rearrangement of these tokens and you'll
is that when you view this
onedimensional sequence as
two-dimensional 4x6 here the first six
uh tokens uh up to here end up being the
first row the next six tokens here end
up being the second row and so on and so
basically it's just going to stack up
this the um every six tokens in this
case as independent rows and it creates
a batch of tokens in this case and so
for example if we are token 25 in the
Transformer when we feed this in and
this becomes the idx this token is going
to see these three tokens and it's going
to try to predict that 198 comes
next so in this way we are able to
create this two-dimensional batch that's
that's quite nice now in terms of the
label that we're going to need for the
Target to calculate the loss function
how do we get that well we could write
some code inside the forward pass
because we know that the next uh token
in a sequence which is the label is just
to the right of us but you'll notice
that actually we for this token at the
very end 13 we don't actually have the
next correct token because we didn't
load it so uh we actually didn't get
enough information here so I'll show you
my favorite way of basically getting
these batches and I like to personally
have not just the input to the
Transformer which I like to call X but I
also like to create the labels uh tensor
which is of the exact same size as X but
contains the targets at every single
position
and so here's the way that I like to do
that I like to make sure that I fetch
plus one uh token because we need the
ground Truth for the very last token uh
for
13 and then when we're creating the
input we take everything up to the last
token not including and view it as 4x6
and when we're creating targets we do
the buffer but starting at index one not
index zero so we're skipping the first
element and we view it in the exact same
size and then when I print this
here's what happens where we see that
basically as an example for this token
25 its Target was 198 and that's now
just stored at the exact same position
in the Target tensor which is 198 and
also this last token 13 now has its
label which is 198 and that's just
because we loaded this plus one here so
basically this is the way I like to do
it you take long sequences you uh view
them in two- dimensional terms so that
you get batch of time and then we make
sure to load one additional token so we
basically load a buffer of tokens of B *
t+ one and then we sort of offset things
and view them and then we have two
tensors one of them is the input to the
Transformer and the other exactly is the
labels and so let's now reorganize this
code and um create a very simple data
loader object that tries to basically
load these tokens and um feed them to
the Transformer and calculate the loss
okay so I reshuffled the code here uh
accordingly so as you can see here I'm
temporarily overwriting U to run a CPU
and importing TI token and all of this
should look familiar we're loading a
th000 characters I'm setting BT to just
be 4 and 32 right now just because we're
debugging we just want to have a single
batch that's very small and all of this
should now look familiar and follows
what we did on the right and then here
we get the we create the model and get
the lits and so so here as you see I
already ran this only runs in a few
seconds but because we have a batch of
uh 4X 32 our lits are now of size 4X 32x
50257 so those are the lit for what
comes next at every position and now we
have the labels which are stored in y so
now is the time to calculate the loss
and then do the backward pass and then
the optimization so let's first
calculate the
loss okay so to calculate the loss we're
going to adjust the forward function of
this NN module in the model and in
particular we're not just going to be
returning logits but also we're going to
return the loss uh and we're going to
not just pass in the input in thees but
also the targets uh in y and now we will
print not Lo just. shape anymore we're
actually going to print the loss
function and then c. exit of zero so
that we skip some of the sampling logic
so now let's swing up to the forward
function which gets called there because
now we also have these optional
targets and when we get the targets we
can also calculate uh the loss and
remember that we want to basically
return uh log just loss and loss by
default is none
but
um let's put this here if uh targets is
not none then we want to calculate loss
and co-pilot is already getting excited
here and calculating the what looks to
be correct loss it is using the cross
entropy loss as is documented here uh so
this is a function in pytorch under the
functional now what is actually
happening here because it looks a little
bit scary uh basically uh the F that
cross entropy does not like
multi-dimensional inputs it can't take a
b BYT by vocap size so what's happening
here is that we are flattening out this
three-dimensional tensor into just two
Dimensions the First Dimension is going
to be calculated automatically and it's
going to be B * T and then the last
Dimension is vocap size so basically
this is uh flattening out this
three-dimensional tensor of logits to
just be two- dimensional B * T all
individual examples and vocap size on uh
in terms of the length of each row and
then it's also flattening out the
targets which are also two- dimensional
at this stage but we're going to just
flatten them out so they're just a
single tensor of B * T and this can then
pass into cross entropy to calculate a
loss which we return so this should
basically at this point run because this
is not too complicated
so let's run it and let's see if we
should be printing the
loss and here we see that we printed 11
uh roughly and so
um and notice that this is the tensor of
a single element which is this number 11
now we also want to be able to calculate
a reasonable uh kind of starting point
for a random rationalized Network so we
covered this in previous videos but our
vocabulary size is
50257 at initialization of the network
you would hope that um every vocab
element is getting roughly a uniform
probability uh so that we're not
favoring at initialization any token way
too much we're not confidently wrong at
initialization so what we're hoping is
that the probability of any arbitrary
token is roughly 1 over 50,2 57 and now
we can sanity check the loss because
remember that the cross entropy loss is
just basically the negative um log
likelihood so if we now take this
probability and we take it through the
natural logarithm and then we do the
negative that is the loss we expect at
initialization and we covered this in
previous videos so I would expect
something around 10.82 and we're seeing
something around 11 so it's not way off
this is roughly the probability I expect
at initialization so that tells me that
the at initialization or probability
distribtion is roughly diffused it's a
good starting point and we can now uh
perform the optimization and tell the
network which elements you know should
follow correctly in what order so at
this point we can do a l step backward
calculate the gradients and do an
optimization so let's get to that okay
so let's do the optimization now um so
here we
have the loss is this is how we get the
loss but now basically we want a load
for Loop here so 4 I in range let's do
50 steps or something like that uh let's
create an Optimizer object in
pytorch um and so here we are using the
atom um Optimizer which is an
alternative to the stochastic radian
descent Optimizer SGD that we were using
so SGD is a lot simpler atom is a bit
more involved and I actually
specifically like the atom W variation
because in my opinion it kind of just
like fixes a bug um so adom w is a bug
fix of atom is what I would say when we
go to the documentation for atom
W oh my
gosh we see um that it takes a bunch of
hyper parameters and it's a little bit
more complicated than the SGD we were
looking at before uh because in addition
to basically updating the parameters
with the gradient uh scaled by the
Learning rate it keeps these buffers
around and it keeps two buffers the m
and the V which it calls the first and
the second moment so something that
looks a bit like momentum and something
that looks a bit like RMS prop if you're
familiar with it but you don't have to
be it's just kind of a normalization
that happens on each gradient element
individually and speeds up the
optimization especially for language
models but I'm not going to go into the
detail right here we're going to treat
it as a bit of a black box and it just
optimizes um the objective faster than
SGD which is what we've seen in the
previous lectures so let's use it as a
black box in our case uh create the
optimizer object and
then go through the optimization
the first thing to always make sure the
co-pilot did not forget to zero the
gradients so um always remember that you
have to start with a zero gradient then
when you get your loss and you do a DOT
backward dot backward adds to gradients
so it deposits gradients it it always
does a plus equals on whatever the
gradients are which is why you must set
them to zero so this accumulates the
gradient from this loss and then we call
the step function on the optimizer to um
update the parameters and to um decrease
the
loss and then we print a step and the
loss do item is used here because loss
is a tensor with a single element do
item will actually uh convert that to a
single float and this float will live
not will will live on the CPU so this
gets to some of the internals again of
the devices but loss is a is a tensor
with a single element and it lifts on
GPU for me because I'm using gpus when
you call item P torch behind the scenes
will take that one-dimensional tensor
ship it back to the CPU uh memory and
convert it into a float that we can just
print so this is the optimization and
this should probably just
work let's see what
happens actually sorry let me instead of
using CPU override let me delete that so
this is a bit faster for me and it runs
on Cuda
oh expected all tensors to be on the
same device but found at least two
devices Cuda zero and CPU so Cuda zero
is the zeroth GPU because I actually
have eight gpus on this box uh so the
zeroth GPU in my box and CPU and model
we have moved to device but when I was
writing this code I actually introduced
a bug because buff we never moved to
device and you have to be careful
because you can't just do buff dot two
of
device um it's not stateful it doesn't
convert it to be a device it instead uh
returns pointer to a new memory which is
on the device so you see how we can just
do model that two a device that does not
apply to tensors you have to do buff
equals
um b.2 device and then this should work
okay so what do we expect to see we
expect to see a reasonable loss in the
beginning and then we continue to
optimize just the single batch and so we
want to see that we can overfit this
single batch we can we can crush this
little batch and we can perfectly
predict the indices on just this little
batch and indeed that is roughly what
we're seeing here
so um we started off at roughly 10.82 11
in this case and then as we continue
optimizing on this single batch without
loading new examples we are making sure
that we can overfit a single batch and
we are getting to very very low loss so
the Transformer is memorizing this
single individual batch and one more
thing I didn't mention is uh the
learning rate here is 3 E4 which is a
pretty good default for most uh
optimizations that you want to run at a
very early debugging stage so this is
our simple inter Loop and uh we are
overfitting a single batch and this
looks good so now what uh what comes
next is we don't just want to overfit a
single batch we actually want to do an
optimization so we actually need to
iterate these XY batches and create a
little data loader uh that makes sure
that we're always getting a fresh batch
and that we're actually optimizing a
reasonable objective so let's do that
next okay so this is what I came up with
and I wrote a little data loader
light um so what this data loader does
is we're importing the token up here
we're reading the entire text file from
this single input.txt
tokenizing it and then we're just
printing the number of tokens in total
and the number of batches in a single
Epoch of iterating over this data set so
how many unique batches do we output
before we loop back around the beginning
of the document and start reading it
again so we start off at position zero
and then we simply walk the document in
batches of B * T so we take chunks of B
* T and then always Advance by B * T and
um it's important to note that we're
always advancing our position by exactly
B * T but when we're fetching the tokens
we're actually fetching from current
position to B * t + 1 and we need that
plus one because remember uh we need the
target token
um for the last token in the current
batch and so that way we can do um the
XY exactly as we did it before and if we
are to um run out of data we'll just
loop back around to zero so this is one
way to write a very very simple data
loader um that simply just goes through
the file in chunks and is good enough
for us uh for current purposes and we're
going to complexify it later and now
we'd like to come back around here and
we'd like to actually use our data
loader so the import Tik token has moved
up and actually all of this is now
useless so instead we just want a train
loader for the training data and we want
to use the same hyper parameters for
four so B size was four and time was
32 and then here we need to get the XY
for the current batch so let's see if
copal gets it because this is simple
enough uh so we call the next batch and
then we um make sure that we have to
move our tensors from CPU to the device
so here when I converted the tokens
notice that I didn't actually move these
tokens to the GPU I left them on CPU
which is the default um and that's just
because I'm trying not to waste too much
memory on the GPU in this case this is a
tiny data set and it would fit uh but
it's fine to just uh ship it to GPU
right now for for our purposes right now
so we get the next batch we keep the
data loader simple CPU class and then
here we actually ship it to the GPU and
do all the computation and uh let's see
if this runs so python train gbt2 pi and
what do we expect to see before this
actually happens what we expect to see
is now we're actually getting the next
batch so we expect to not overfit a
single batch and so I expect our loss to
come down but not too much and that's
because I still expect it to come down
because in the
50257 tokens many of those tokens never
occur in our data set so there are some
very easy gains to be made here in the
optimization by for example taking the
biases of all the loits that never occur
and driving them to negative infinity
and that would basically just it's just
that all of these crazy unic codes or
different languages those tokens never
occur so their probability should be
very low and so the gains that we should
be seeing are along the lines of
basically deleting the usage of tokens
that never occur that's probably most of
the loss gain that we're going to see at
this scale right now uh but we shouldn't
come to a zero uh because um we are only
doing 50 iterations and I don't think
that's enough to do an eoch right now so
let's see what we
got we um we have 338,000
tokens which makes sense with our 3:1
compression ratio because there are 1
million uh characters so one Epoch with
the current setting of B and T will take
2, 600 batches and we're only doing 50
batches of optimization in
here so we start off in a familiar
territory as expected and then we seem
to come down to about 6.6 so basically
things seem to be working okay right now
with respect to our expectations so
that's good okay next I want to actually
fix a bug that we have in our code um
it's not a major bug but it is a bug
with respect to how gpt2 training uh
should
happen um
so the buck is the following we were not
being careful enough when we were
loading the weights from hugging face
and we actually missed a little detail
so if we come
here notice that um the shape of these
two tensors is the same so this one here
is the token embedding at the bottom of
the
Transformer right so and this one here
is the language modeling head at the top
of the
Transformer and both of these are
basically two-dimensional tensors and
they shape is identical so here the
first one is the output embedding the
token embedding and the second one is
this linear layer at the very top the
classifier layer both of them are of
shape
50257 X
768 um this one here is giving us our
token embeddings at the bottom and this
one here is taking the 768 channels of
the Transformer and trying to upscale
that to 50, 257 to get the Lis for the
next token so they're both the same
shape but more than that actually if you
look at um comparing their elements um
in pytorch this is an element wise
equality so then we use do all and we
see that every single element is
identical and more than that we see that
if we actually look at the data pointer
uh this is what this is a way in pytorch
to get the actual pointer to the uh data
and the storage we see that actually the
pointer is identical so not only are
these two separate tensors that happen
to have the same shape and elements
they're actually pointing to the
identical tensor so what's happening
here is that this is a common weight
tying scheme uh that actually comes from
the original
um from the original attention is all
you need paper and actually even the
reference before it so if we come
here
um eddings and softmax in the attention
is all you need paper they mentioned
that in our model we shared the same
weight Matrix between the two embedding
layers and the pre softmax linear
transformation similar to 30 um so this
is an awkward way to phrase that these
two are shared and they're tied and
they're the same Matrix and the 30
reference is this
paper um so this came out in
2017 and you can read the full paper but
basically it argues for this weight
tying scheme and I think intuitively the
idea for why you might want to do this
comes from from this paragraph here and
basically you you can observe
that um you actually want these two
matrices to behave similar in the
following sense if two tokens are very
similar semantically like maybe one of
them is all lowercase and the other one
is all uppercase or it's the same token
in a different language or something
like that if you have similarity between
two tokens presumably you would expect
that they are uh nearby in the token
embedding space but in the exact same
way you'd expect that if you have two
tokens that are similar semantically
you'd expect them to get the same
probabilities at the output of a
transformer because they are
semantically similar and so both
positions in the Transformer at the very
bottom and at the top have this property
that similar tokens should have similar
embeddings or similar weights and so
this is what motivates their exploration
here and they they kind of you know I
don't want to go through the entire
paper and and uh you can go through it
but this is what they observe they also
observe that if you look at the output
embeddings they also behave like word
embeddings um if you um if you just kind
of try to use those weights as word
embeddings um so they kind of observe
this similarity they try to tie them and
they observe that they can get much
better performance in that way and so
this was adopted and the attention is
all need paper and then it was used
again in gpt2 as well
so I couldn't find it in the
Transformers implementation I'm not sure
where they tie those embeddings but I
can find it in the original gpt2 code U
introduced by open aai so this is um
openai gpt2 Source model and here where
they are forwarding this model and this
is in tensorflow but uh that's okay we
see that they get the wte token
embeddings and then here is the incoder
of the token embeddings and the
position and then here at the bottom
they Ed the WT again to do the lits so
when they get the loits it's a math Mo
of uh this output from the Transformer
and the wte tensor is
reused um and so the wte tensor
basically is used twice on the bottom of
the Transformer and on the top of the
Transformer and in the backward pass
we'll get gradients contributions from
both branches right and these gradients
will add up um on the wte tensor um so
we'll get a contribution from the
classifier list
and then at the very end of the
Transformer we'll get a contribution at
the at the bottom of it float floating
again into the wte uh tensor so we want
to we are currently not sharing WT and
our code but we want to do
that um
so weight sharing scheme um and one way
to do this let's see if goil gets it oh
it does okay uh so this is one way to do
it
uh
basically relatively straightforward
what we're doing here is we're taking
the wte do weight and we're simply uh
redirecting it to point to the LM head
so um this basically copies the data
pointer right it copies the reference
and now the wte weight becomes orphaned
uh the old value of it and uh pytorch
will clean it up python will clean it up
and so we are only left with a single
tensor and it's going to be used twice
in the forward pass and uh this is to my
knowledge all that's required so we
should be able to use this and this
should probably train uh we're just
going to basically be using this exact
same sensor twice and
um we weren't being careful with
tracking the likelihoods but uh
according to the paper and according to
the results you'd actually expect
slightly better results doing this and
in addition to that one other reason
that this is very very nice for us is
that this is a ton of parameters right
uh what is the size here it's 768 *
50257 so This Is 40 million parameters
and this is a 124 million parameter
model so 40 divide 124 so this is like
30% of the parameters are being saved
using this weight time scheme and so
this might be one of the reasons that
this is working slightly better if
you're not training the model long
enough because of the weight tying uh
you don't have to train as many
parameters and so you become more
efficient um in terms of the training
process uh because you have fewer
parameters and you're putting in this
inductive bias that these two embeddings
should share similarities between tokens
so this is the way time scheme and we've
saved a ton of parameters and we expect
our model to work slightly better
because of the scheme okay next I would
like us to be a bit more careful with
the initialization and to try to follow
the way gpt2 initialized their model now
unfortunately the gpt2 paper and the
gpt3 paper are not very explicit about
initialization so we kind of have to
read between the lines uh and instead of
going to the paper which is quite vague
um there's a bit of information in the
code that open I released so when we go
to the model.py we see that when they
initialize their weights they are using
the standard deviation of
0.02 and that's how they they so this is
a normal distribution for the weights
and the standard deviation is
0.02 for the bias they initialize that
with
zero and then when we scroll down
here why is this not scrolling
um the token embeddings are initialized
at
0.02 and position embeddings at 0.01 for
some reason so those are the
initializations and we'd like to mirror
that in
gpt2 uh in our module here so here's a
snippet of code that I sort of came up
with very
quickly so what's happening here is at
the end of our initializer for the GPT
module we're calling the apply function
of NN module and that iterates all the
sub modules of this module and uh
applies in it weights function on them
and so what's happening here is that
we're in we're iterating all the modules
here and if they are an nn. linear
module then we're going to make sure to
initialize the weight using a normal
with the standard deviation of
0.02 if there's a bias in this layer we
will make sure to initialize that to
zero note that zero initialization for
the bias is not actually the pyto
default um by default the bias here is
initialized with a uniform so uh that's
interesting so we make sure to use zero
and for the embedding we're just going
to use 0.02 and um keep it the same um
so we're not going to change it to 0.01
for positional because it's about the
same and then if you look through our
model the only other layer that requires
initialization and that has parameters
is the layer norm and the fighter defer
initialization sets the scale in the
layer Norm to be one and the offset in
the layer Norm to be zero so that's
exactly what we want and so we're just
going to uh keep it that way and so this
is the default initialization if we are
following the um where is it the uh gpt2
uh source code that they released I
would like to point out by the way that
um typically the standard deviation here
on this initialization if you follow the
Javier initialization would be one of
over the square root of the number of
features that are incoming into this
layer but if you'll notice actually 0.02
is basically consistent with that
because the the model sizes inside these
Transformers for gpt2 are roughly 768
1600 Etc so 1 over the square root of
for example 768 gives us
0.03 if we plug in 600 1,600 we get
0.02 if we plug in three times that
0.014 Etc so basically 0.02 is roughly
in the vicinity of reasonable values for
the for um for these initializations
anyway so so it's not uh completely
crazy to be hard coding 0.02 here uh but
you'd like typically uh some something
that grows with the model size instead
but we will keep this because that is
the gpt2 initialization per their source
code but we are not fully done yet on
initialization because there's one more
caveat here so
here a mod initialization which accounts
for the accumulation on the residual
path with model depth is used we scale
the weight of residual layers of
initialization by factor of one over squ
of n where n is the number of residual
layers so this is what gbt2 paper says
so we have not implemented that yet and
uh we can do so now now I'd like to
actually kind of like motivate a little
bit what they mean here I think um so
here's roughly what they
mean if you start out with zeros in your
residual stream remember that each
residual stream is a is of this form
where we continue adding to it X is X
plus something some kind of contribution
so every single block of the residual uh
Network contributes some uh amount and
it gets added and so what ends up
happening is that the variance of the
activations in the residual stream grows
so here's a small example if we start at
zero and then we for 100 times uh we
have sort of this residual stream of of
768 uh zeros and then 100 times we add
um random which is a normal distribution
zero mean one standard deviation if we
add to it then by the end the residual
stream has grown to have standard
deviation of 10 and that's just because
um we're always adding um these numbers
and so this scaling factor that they use
here exactly compensates for that growth
so if we take n and we basically um
scale down every one of these
contributions into the residual stream
by one over theare Ro of n so 1 over
theun of n is n to the 0.5
right because n the5 is the square root
and then one over the square root is n.5
if we scale it in this way then we see
that we actually get um
one
so this is a way to control the growth
of of activations inside the residual
stream in the forward pass and so we'd
like to initialize in the same way where
these weights that are at the end of
each block so this C uh layer uh the gbt
paper proposes to scale down those
weights by one over the square root of
the number of residual
layers so one crude way to implement
this is the following I don't know if
this is uh pyro sanctioned but it works
for me is we'll do in the
initialization see that s that do
special nanog
GPT uh scale in it is one so we're
setting um kind of like a flag for this
module there must be a better way in py
torch right but I don't
know okay so we're basically attaching
this flag and trying to make sure that
it doesn't conflict with anything
previously and then when we come down
here this STD should be 0.02 by default
but then if
haat um module of this thing
then STD *
equals
um copal is not guessing correctly uh so
we want one over the square root of the
number of layers so
um the number of residual layers here is
twice
times Salt out config layers and then
this times .5 so we want to scale down
that standard deviation and this should
be um correct and Implement that I
should clarify by the way that the two
times number of layers comes from the
fact that every single one of our layers
in the Transformer actually has two
blocks that add to the ridal pathway
right we have the attention and then the
MLP so that's where the two times comes
from and the other thing to mention is
that uh what's slightly awkward but
we're not going to fix it is that um
because we are weight sharing the wte
and the LM head in this iteration of our
old subm modules we're going to actually
come around to that tensor twice so
we're going to first initialize it as an
embedding with 0.02 and then we're going
to come back around it again in a linear
and initialize it again using 0.02 and
it's going to be 0.02 because the LM
head is of course not not scaled so it's
not going to come here it's just it's
going to be basically initialized twice
using the identical same initialization
but that's okay and then scrolling over
here I added uh some code here so that
we have
reproducibility um to set the seeds and
now we should be able to python train
gpt2 pi and let this running and as far
as I know this is the gpt2
initialization uh in the way we've
implemented it right now so this
looks uh reasonable to me okay so at
this point we have the gpt2 model we
have some confidence that it's correctly
implemented we've initialized it
properly and we have a data loader
that's iterating through data batches
and we can train so now comes the fun
part I'd like us to speed up the
training by a lot so we're getting our
money's worth with respect to the
hardware that we are uh using here and
uh we're going to speed up the training
by quite a bit uh now you always want to
start with what Hardware do you have
what does it offer and are you fully
utilizing it so in my case if we go to
Nvidia
SMI we can see
that I have eight gpus and each one of
those gpus is an a100 sxm 80 gb so this
is the GPU that I have available to me
in this box now when I look when I use
um to spin up these kinds of Boxes by
the way my favorite place to go to is
Lambda Labs um they do sponsor my
development and that of my projects uh
but I this is my favorite place to go
and this is where you can spin up one of
these machines and you pay per hour and
it's very very simple
so I like to spin them up and then
connect vsod to it and that's how I
develop now when we look at the A1 100s
that are available here a100 80 GB sxm
is the um GPU that I have here and we
have a bunch of numbers here for um how
many calculations you can expect out of
this GPU so when I come over here
and I break in right after here so
python
trity so I'm breaking in right after we
calculate the loit and
laws and the interesting thing I'd like
you to note is when I do lit. dtype this
prints a torch. FL 32 so by default iny
torch when you create tensors um and
this is the case for all the activations
and for the parameters of the network
and so on by default everything is in
float 32 that means that every single
number activation or weight and so on is
using a float representation that has 32
bits and uh that's actually quite a bit
of memory and it turns out empirically
that for deep learning as a
computational workload this is way too
much and deep learning and the training
of these networks can tolerate
significantly lower precisions um not
all computational workflows can tolerate
small Precision so for example um if we
go back to to the data sheet you'll see
that actually these gpus support up to
fp64 and this is quite useful I
understand for a lot of um scientific
Computing applications and there really
need this uh but we don't need that much
Precision for deep learning training So
currently we are here
fp32 and with this code as it is right
now we expect to get at at most 19.5
Tera flops of performance that means
we're doing 19.5 trillion operations
floating Point operations so this is
floating Point multiply add most um most
likely and so these are the floating
Point operations
uh now notice that if we are willing to
go down in Precision so tf32 is a lower
Precision format we're going to see in a
second you can actually get an 8X
Improvement here and if you're willing
to go down to float 16 or B float 16 you
can actually get time 16x performance
all the way to 312 Tera flops you see
here that Nvidia likes to site numbers
that have an asterisk here this asterisk
uh says with sparsity uh but we are not
going to be using sparsity in R code and
I don't know that this is very widely
used in the industry right now so most
people look at this number here uh
without sparcity and you'll notice that
we could have got even more here but
this is int 8 and int 8 is used for
inference not for training uh because
int 8 has a um it basically has um
uniform
spacing um and uh we actually require a
float so that we get a better match to
the uh normal distributions that occur
during training of neural networks where
both activations and weights are
distributed as a normal distribution and
so uh floating points are really
important to to match that uh
representation so we're not typically
using int 8 uh for training but we are
using it for inference and if we bring
down the Precision we can get a lot more
Terra flops out of the tensor course
available in the gpus we'll talk about
that in a second but in addition to that
if all of these numbers have fewer bits
of representation it's going to be much
easier to move them around and that's
where we start to get into the memory
bandwidth and the memory of the model so
not only do we have a finite capacity of
the number of bits that our GPU can
store but in addition to that there's a
speed with which you can access this
memory um and you have a certain memory
bandwidth it's a very precious resource
and in fact many of the deep learning uh
work workloads for training are memory
bound and what that means is actually
that the tensor cores that do all these
extremely fast multiplications most of
the time they're waiting around they're
idle um because we can't feed them with
data fast enough we can't load the data
fast enough from memory so typical
utilizations of your Hardware if you're
getting 60% uh utilization you're
actually doing extremely well um so half
of the time in a well-tuned application
your tensor cores are not doing
multiplies because the data is not
available so the memory bandwidth here
is extremely important as well and if we
come down in the Precision for all the
floats all the numbers weights and
activations suddenly require less memory
so we can store more and we can access
it faster so everything speeds up and
it's amazing and now let's reap the
benefits of it um and let's first look
at the tensor float 32
format okay so first of all what are
tensor cores well tensor course tensor
core is just an instruction in the a100
architecture right so so what it does is
it does basically a little 4x4 Matrix
multiply so uh this is just matrix
multiplication here of 4x4 matrices and
there are multiple configurations as to
what Precision any of these matrices are
it in what Precision the internal
accumulate happens and then what is the
output Precision input precisions Etc so
there's a few switches but it's
basically a 4x4 multiply and then
anytime we have any operations that
require Magic multiplication uh they get
broken up into these into this
instruction of little 4x4 multiply and
so everything gets broken up into this
instruction because it's the fastest way
to multiply matrices and it turns out
that most of the computational work that
we're doing up above uh all of it really
is matrix multiplication most of the
work computationally happens in the
linear layers um linear linear Etc
there's a few things sandwiched in
between so there's some additions in
residuals there's some G nonlinearities
there's some layer Norms Etc but if you
just time them you'll see that these are
nothing like basically the in
Transformer is just a bunch of Matrix
multiplications really um and especially
at this small scale 124 million
parameter model actually the biggest
matrix multiplication by far is the
classifier layer at the top that is a
massive Matrix multiply of going from
768 to
50257 and that Matrix multiply dominates
anything else that happens in that
Network roughly speaking so it's Matrix
multiplies that become a lot faster
which are hidden inside our linear
layers and they're accelerated through
tensor course now the best reference I
would say for tensor course is basically
just go to the um a 100 architecture
white paper and then it's pretty
detailed and but I think people it's
like relatively readable mostly if you
half understand what's happening um so
figure 9 tensor float
32 so this is the explanation basically
for tf32 and what happens here and you
see that there's many configuration
options here available so the input
operands and what precisions are they in
the accumulator and um what um basically
the um the internal representation
within the instruction when you do the
accumulate of this matrix
multiplication so the intermediate plus
equals um of the intermediate little
vector multiplies here that all happens
in
fp32 and then uh this is an aex
improvement as I mentioned to the Ops
that we get so tf32 specifically we're
looking at this row here and the way
this works
is
um normally fp32 has 32 bits
tf32 is the exact same bits we have one
sign bit we have eight exponent bits
except the mantisa bits get cropped in
the float and so basically um we end up
with just 19 bits instead of 32 bits
because the last 133 bits get truncated
they get dropped um and all this is
internal to the instruction so none of
it is visible to anything in our pytorch
uh none of our pytorch code will change
all of the numbers will look identical
it's just that when you call the tensor
core um instruction internally in the
hardware it will crop out these 13 bits
and that allows it to uh calculate this
little Matrix multiply significantly
faster 8X faster now of course this
speed up comes at a cost and the cost is
that we are reducing the Precision our
accumulate is still an fp32 our output
is fp32 our inputs are fp32 but
internally things get truncated in the
operand to perform the operation faster
and so our results are starting to be a
bit more approximate but empirically
when you actually train with this you
basically can't tell the difference
so the reason I like tf32 is because if
you can tolerate a little bit of a
Precision fudge um then this is free
like none of your codes sees this it's
fully internal to the operation and the
operation to you just go 8X faster and
it's a bit more approximate and so it's
a pretty sweet spot I would say in
optimization and uh let's see what that
looks like first so I've set up our Cod
to just time the uh iterations so import
time I changed the hyper parameters so
that we have something a bit more that
reflects uh kind of workload that we
want to run uh because we want to do a
fairly large run at the end of this so
let's use batch size 16 and let's now
use the actual gpt2 um maximum sequence
length of 10,24
tokens uh so this is the
configuration and then for 50 iterations
I'm just doing something very lazy here
I'm doing time. time to get the current
time and then this is the optimization
Loop and now I want to time how long
this takes now one issue with working
with gpus is that as your
CPU um when your CPU runs it's just
scheduling work on GPU it's ordering
some work right and so it send a request
and then it continues running and so we
can actually it can happen sometimes
that we sort of um speed through this
and we queue up a lot of kernels to run
on the GPU and then the CPU sort of like
gets here and takes time at time but
actually the GPU is still running
because it takes it time to actually
work through the work that was scheduled
to run and so you're just building up a
queue for the GPU and so actually if you
need to you want to wait toat data
synchronize and this will wait for the
GPU to finish all the work that was
scheduled to run up above here and then
we can actually take the time so
basically we're waiting for the GPU to
stop this iteration take time and then
we're going to just print it so
so here I'm going to run the training
Loop and here on the right I'm watching
Nvidia SMI so we start off at zero um
we're not using the GPU and then by
default P will use gpu0 so we see that
it gets filled up and we're using 35 GB
out of 80 gabt
available and then here on the left we
see that because we've cranked up the
batch
size now it's only 20 batches to do a
single Epoch on our tiny Shakespeare
and we see that we're seeing roughly a
th000 milliseconds per iteration here
right
so the first iteration sometimes is
slower and that's because pytorch might
be doing a lot of initializations here
on the very first iteration and so it's
probably initializing all these uh
tensors and buffers to hold all the
gradients and I'm not 100% sure all the
work that happens here but uh this could
be a slower iteration when you're timing
your logic you always want to be careful
with that but basically we're seeing a
th000 milliseconds per iteration
um and so this will run for roughly 50
seconds as we have it right now so
that's our Baseline in flo 32 one more
thing I wanted to mention is that if
this doesn't fit into your GPU and
you're getting out of memory errors then
start decreasing your batch size until
things fit so instead of 16 try eight or
four or whatever you need to fit um the
batch into your GPU and if you have a
bigger GPU you can actually potentially
get away with 32 and so on uh by default
you want to basically max out has Max
Max out the batch size that fits on your
GPU and you want to keep it nice numbers
so use numbers that have lots of powers
of two in them so 16 is a good number 8
24 32 48 These are nice numbers but
don't use something like 17 uh because
that will run very inefficiently on a
GPU uh and we're going to see that a bit
later as well so for now let's just
stick with
16124 and uh the one thing that I added
also here and I ran it again is I'm
calculating a tokens per second
throughput during training
because we might end up changing the
backat size around over time but tokens
per second is the objective measure that
we actually really care about how many
tokens of data are we training on and
what is the throughput of tokens that
we're getting in our optimization so
right now we're processing and training
on 163,000 tokens per second roughly and
that's a bit more objective
metric okay so let's now enable tf32 now
luckily pytorch makes this fairly easy
for us and uh to enable tf32 you just
need to do a single line and is this and
when we go to the py documentation here
for this function basically this tells
pych what kind of kernels to run and by
default I believe it is highest highest
Precision for mat M and that means that
everything happens in float 32 just like
it did before but if we set it to high
as we do right now Matrix
multiplications will not use tensor flow
32 when it's
available my GPU is a100 so it's an
ampere series and therefore tf32 is
available if you have an older GPU this
might not be available for you but for
my GPU it's available and so what I
expect P to do is that every single
place where we see an nn. linear inside
there there's a matrix multiplication
and I expect that matrix multiplication
now to be um running on tensor course
utilizing the TF 32%
so this is the single line of change
that is I believe necessary and let's
rerun this now we saw that um in terms
of the throughput that is promised to us
we're supposed to be getting 8X roughly
so let's see what
happens and that 8X came from here right
um 8X and it also came from looking at
it um here 156 T flops instead of of
19.5 okay so what actually happened uh
so we're seeing that our throughput
roughly 3x not aex so we are going we're
from 1,000 milliseconds we're going down
to 300 milliseconds and our throughput
is now about 50,000 tokens per second so
we have a roughly 3x instead of 8X so
what happened and basically What's
Happening Here is again a lot of these
workloads are memory bound and so even
though the
tf32 offers in principle a lot faster
throughput all of these numbers
everywhere are still float 32s and it's
float 32 numbers that are being shipped
all over the place through the memory
system and is just costing us way too
much time to shuttle around all this
data and so even though we've made the
multiply itself much faster uh we are
memory bound and we're not actually
seeing the full benefit uh that would
come from uh this napkin math here uh
that said we are getting one a 3X faster
throughput and this is free um single
line of code in P torch all your
variables are still float 32 everywhere
it just runs faster and it's slightly
more approximate but we're not going to
notice it basically uh so that's
tf32 okay so let's now continue so we've
exercised this row and um we saw that we
can crop out some of the Precision
inside the operation itself but we saw
that we're still memory bound we're
still moving around all these floats
right otherwise and we're paying that
cost because of this so let's now
decrease the amount of stuff that we're
going to be moving around and we're
going to do that by dropping down to B
float 16 so we're only going to be
maintaining 16 bits per float and we're
going to use the B flat 16 and I'll
explain in a bit uh fp16 difference and
uh we're going to be in this row so when
we go back to the documentation here for
the a
100 um we see here the precisions that
are are available and this is the
original fp32 the tf32 crops out the
Precision and then here in
bf16 you see that it is very similar to
tf32 but it's even more aggressive in
cropping off of the Precision the
mantisa of this float so the important
thing with B float 16 is that the
exponent bits and the sign bit of course
remain unchanged so if you're familiar
with your float numbers and I think this
should should probably be an entire
video by itself
the exponent sets the range that you can
represent of your numbers and the
Precision is how much Precision you have
for your numbers and so the range of
numbers is identical but we can we have
fewer possibilities within that range
because we are truncating the Mena so we
have less Precision in that
range what that means is that things are
actually fairly nice because we have the
original range of numbers that are
representable in float but we just have
less Precision for it and the difference
with fp16 is that they actually touch
and change the range so fp16 cannot
represent the full range of fp32 it has
a reduced range and that's where you
start to actually run into issues
because now you need uh these gradient
scalers and things like that and I'm not
going to go into the detail of that in
this video because that's a whole video
by itself but fb16 actually historically
came first that was available in the
Volta series before Amper and so fp16
came first and everyone started to train
in fp16 but everyone had to use all
these gradient scaling operations which
are kind of annoying and it's an
additional source of state and
complexity and the reason for that was
because the exponent range was reduced
in fp16 so that's the i e fp16 spec and
then they came out with bf16 and the
Ampere and they made it much simpler
because we're just truncating manessa we
have the exact same range and we do not
need gradient scalers so everything is
much much simpler now when we do use
bf16 though we are impacting the numbers
that we might be seeing in our pytorch
code these this change is not just local
to the operation itself so let's see how
that works
um there's some documentation here that
so I think this is probably the best
best page to explain how to use mixed
Precision in pytorch um because there
are many other tutorials and so on even
within pitor documentation that are a
lot more confusing and so I recommend
specifically this one because there's
five other copies that I would not
recommend and then when we come
here ignore everything about everything
ignore everything about gradient
scalers and only look at torch.
AutoCast and basically also this comes
to a single line of code at the end so
this is the context manager that we
want and we want to use that in our
Network when you click into the torch.
AutoCast autocasting it has a few more
uh a bit more guideline for you so it's
telling you do not call B flat 16 on any
of your tensors just use AutoCast and
only surround the uh forward pass of the
model and the loss calculation and
that's the only two things that you
should be surrounding leave the backward
and the optimizer step alone so that's
the guidance that comes from the P team
so we're going to follow that guidance
and for us because the L calculation is
inside of the model forward pass for us
we are going to be doing
this and then we don't want to be using
torch Flo 16 because if we do that we
need to start using gradient scalers as
well so we are going to be using B float
16 this is only possible to do an ampere
uh but this means that the changes are
extremely minimal like basically just
this one line of
code um let me first break
in to here before we actually run this
so right after logits I'd like to show
you that different from the tf32 that we
saw this is actually going to impact our
tensors
so this Lis tensor if we now look at
this and we look at the dtype we
suddenly see that this is now B float
16 uh it's not float 32 anymore so our
activations have been changed the
activations tensor is now B FL 16 but
not everything has changed so model.
Transformer
wte uh this is the weight uh token
embedding table it has a weight inside
it and the dtype of this weight this
parameter is still torch float 32 so our
parameters seem to still be in float 32
but our activations the loits are now in
P 16 so clearly this is why we get the
mixed Precision some things pytorch is
keeping inlow 32 some things pytorch is
converting to lower Precision um and
what gets converted at what point is not
super clear I remember scrolling
down is it
here okay I can't find
it I I thought it was here okay there we
go so there are a few docks on when
you're using this AutoCast what gets
converted to B FL 16 and and when so for
example only these Matrix multiply like
operations get converted to float 16 but
a lot of operations remain in float 32
so in particular a lot of normalizations
like layer norms and things like that
not all of those layers might be
converted um so only some layers
selectively would be running B flat 16
but things like softmax uh layer Norms
uh log um log soft Max so loss function
calculations a lot of those things might
remain in float 32 because they are more
susceptible to Precision changes major
multiplies are fairly um
robust to Precision changes uh so some
parts of the network are um impacted
more or less by the Precision
change um so basically only some parts
of the of the model are running in
reduced Precision let's take it for a
spin and let's actually see what kind of
improvement we achieve
here okay so we used to be 333
milliseconds we're now 300
and we used to be somewhere around
50,000 tokens per second we're now at 55
so we're definitely running faster but
maybe not a lot faster and that's
because there are still many many
bottlenecks in our gbt2 we're just
getting started but we have dropped down
the precision as far as we can with my
current GPU which is a100 we're using
pytorch AutoCast unfortunately I don't
actually exactly know what pytorch
AutoCast do uh does I don't actually
know exactly what's in B flat 16 what's
in float 32
we could go in and we could start to
scrutinize it um but these are the kinds
of rules that pytorch has internally and
unfortunately they don't documented very
well uh so we're not going to go into
that into in too much detail but for now
we are training in B flow 16 we do not
need a gradient scaler and the reason
things are running faster is because um
we are able to run tensor course in B FL
16 now that means we are in this row but
uh we are also paying in Precision for
this uh so um we expect slightly less
accurate results with respect to the
original fp32 but empirically in many
cases this is a worth it uh kind of
tradeoff because it allows you to run
faster and you could for example train
longer and make up for the uh for that
Precision decrease so um that's b46 for
now okay so as we can see we are
currently at about 300 milliseconds uh
per iteration and we're now going to
reach for some really heavy weapons in
the pie torch Arsenal and in particular
we're going to introduce torch. compile
so torch. compile is really quite
incredible infrastructure from the
pytorch team and it's basically a
compiler for neural networks like it's
almost like GCC for CN C++ code this is
just this GCC of neural nuts so came out
a while ago and extremely simple to use
um the way to use torch compile is to do
this it's a single line of code to
compile your model and return it now
this line of code will cost you
compilation time but as you might guess
it's going to make the code a lot faster
so let's actually run that because this
will take some time to run but currently
remember we're at 300 milliseconds and
we'll see what happens now while this is
running I'd like to explain a little bit
of what torch. compile does under the
hood uh so feel free to read this page
of P torch but basically there's no real
good reason for you to not use torch
compile in your pie torch I kind of feel
like you should be using almost by
default if you're not uh unless you're
debugging and you want your code to run
really fast and there's one line here in
torch compile that I found that actually
kind of like gets to why this is faster
speed up mainly comes from reducing
python overhead and GPU read wrs so let
me unpack that a little bit um okay here
we are okay so we went from 300
milliseconds we're now running at 129
milliseconds so this is uh 300 129 about
2.3x Improvement from a single line of
code in py torch uh so quite incredible
so what is happening what's happening
under the hood well when you pass the
model to torch
compile what we have here in this NN
module this is really just the
algorithmic description of what we'd
like to happen in our Network and torch
compile will analyze the entire thing
and it will look at what operations You'
like to use and with the benefit of
knowing exactly what's going to happen
it doesn't have to run in What's called
the e mode it doesn't have to just kind
of like go layer by layer like the
python interpreter normally would start
at the
forward and the python interpreter will
go okay let's do this operation and then
let's do that operation and it kind of
materializes all the operations as it
goes through uh so these um calculations
are dispatched and run in this order and
the python interpreter and this code
doesn't know what kind of operations are
going to happen later but torch compile
sees your entire code at the same time
and it's able to know what operations
you intend to run and it will kind of
optimize that process the first thing it
will do is will it will take out the
python interpreter from the forward pass
entirely and it will kind of compile
this entire neural net as a single
object with no python interpreter
involved so it knows exactly what's
going to run and we'll just run that and
it's all going to be running in
efficient
code uh the second thing that happens is
uh this read write that they mentioned
very briefly so a good example of that I
think is the G nonlinearity that we've
been looking at so here we use the n and
G now this here is me uh basically just
breaking up the inang Galu uh which you
remember has this formula so this here
is the equivalent implementation to
what's happening inside g algorithmic l
it's
identical Now by default if uh we just
we using this instead of ending. G here
what would happen without torch compile
well the python interpreter would make
its way here and then it would be okay
well there's an input well let me first
let me raise this input to the third
power and it's going to dispatch a
kernel that takes your input and raises
it to the third power and that kernel
will run and when this kernel runs what
ends up happening is this input is
stored in the memory of the GPU so
here's a helpful example of the layout
of what's happening right you have your
CPU this is in every single computer
there's a few cores in there and you
have your uh Ram uh your memory and the
CPU can talk to the memory and this is
all well known but now we've added the
GPU and the GPU is a slightly different
architecture of course they can
communicate and it's different in that
it's got a lot more course than a CPU
all of those cores are individually a
lot simpler too but it also has memory
right this high bandwidth memory I'm
sorry if I'm botching it hbm I don't
even know what that stands for I'm just
realizing that
but uh this is the memory and it's very
equivalent to uh RAM basically in the
computer and what's happening is that
input is living in the memory and when
you do input
cubed this has to travel to the GPU to
the course and to all the caches and
registers on the actual chip of this
GPU and it has to calculate the all the
elements to the third and then it saves
the result back to the memory and it's
this uh travel time that actually causes
a lot of issues so here remember this
memory bandwidth we can communicate
about 2 terabytes per second which is a
lot but also we have to Traverse this
link and it's very slow so here on the
GPU we're on chip and everything is
super fast within the chip but going to
the memory is extremely expensive takes
extremely long amount of time and so we
load the input do the calculations and
load back the output and this round trip
takes a lot of time
and now right after we do that we
multiply by this constant so what
happens then is we dispatch another
kernel and then the result travels back
all the elements get multiplied by a
constant and then the results travel
back to the memory and then we take the
result and we add back input and so this
entire thing again travels to the GPU
adds the inputs and gets written back so
we're making all these round trips from
the memory to actually where the comput
happens because all the tensor cores and
alus and everything like that is all
stored on the chip in the GPU so we're
doing a ton of round trips and pytorch
uh without using torch compile doesn't
know to optimize this because it doesn't
know what kind of operations you're
running later you're just telling it
raise the power to the third then do
this then do that and it will just do
that in that sequence but torch compile
sees your entire code it will come here
and it will realize wait all of these
are elementwise operations and actually
what I'm going to do is I'm going to do
a single trip of input to the GPU then
for every single element I'm going to do
all of these operations while that
memory is on the GPU or chunks of it
rather and then I'm going to write back
a single time so we're not going to have
these round trips and that's one example
of what's called kernel fusion and is a
major way in which everything is sped up
so basically if you have your benefit of
onet and you know exactly what you're
going to compute you can optimize your
round trips to the memory and you're not
going to pay the the memory bandwidth
cost and that's fundamentally what makes
some of these operations a lot faster
and what they mean by read writes
here so let me erase this because we are
not using it and yeah we should be using
torch compile and our code is now
significantly faster and we're doing
about
125,000 tokens per second but we still
have a long way to go before we move on
I wanted to supplement the discussion a
little bit with a few more figures uh
because this is a complic topic but it's
worth understanding on a high level uh
what's happening here and I could
probably spend an entire video of like
two hours on this but just the preview
of that basically so this chip here that
is uh the GPU this chip is where all the
calculations happen mostly but this chip
also does have some memory in it but
most of the memory by far is here in the
high bandwidth memory hbm and is
connected they're connected um but these
are two separate chips basically
now here this is a zoom in of kind of
this cartoon diagram of a GPU and what
we're seeing here is number one you see
this hbm I I realize it's probably very
small for you but on the sides here it
says hbm and so that that's the links to
the hbm now the hbm is again off chip on
the chip there are a large number of
these streaming
multiprocessors uh every one of these is
an SM there's 120 of them in total and
this is where the a lot of the
calculations happen and this is a zoom
in of a single individual as it has
these four quadrants and see for example
tensor core this is where a lot of the
Matrix multiply stuff happens but
there's all these other units to do all
different kinds of calculations for fp64
fp32 and for integers and so on now so
we have all this uh logic here to do the
calculations but in addition to that on
the chip there is memory sprinkled
throughout the chip so L2 cache is some
amount of memory that lives on the chip
and then on the SMS themselves there's
L1 cache I realized it's probably very
small for you but this blue bar is L1
and there's also registers um and so
there is memory stored here but the way
this memory is stored is very different
from the way memory is stored in hbm uh
this is a very different implementation
uh using um just in terms of like what
the Silicon looks like it's a very
different
implementation um so here you would
using transistors and capacitors and
here it's a very different
implementation uh with SRAM and what
that looks like but long story short is
um there is um memory inside the chip
but it's not a lot of memory that's the
critical point so this is some C this is
a example diagram of a slightly
different GPU just like here where it
shows that for example typical numbers
for CPU Dam memory which is this thing
here you might have one tab of this
right but it would be extremely
expensive to access especially for a GPU
you have to go through the CPU here now
next we have the hbm so we have tens of
gigabytes of hbm memory on a typical GPU
here but it's as I mentioned very
expensive to access and then on the chip
itself everything is extremely fast
within the chip but we only have couple
10 megabytes of memory collectively
throughout the Chip And so there's just
not enough space because the memory is
very expensive on the chip and so
there's not a lot of it but it is
lightning fast to access in relative
terms and so basically whenever we have
these kernels um the more accurate
picture of what's Happening Here is that
we take these inputs which live by
default on the global memory and now we
need to perform some calculation so we
start streaming the data from the um
Global memory to the uh chip we perform
the calculations on the chip and then
stream it back and store it back to the
global memory right and so if we are if
we don't have torch compile we are
streaming the data through the chip
doing the calculations and saving to the
memory and we're doing those round trips
many many
times but uh if it's torch compiled then
we start streaming the memory as before
but then while we're on the chip we're
we're we have a chunk of the uh data
that we're trying to process so that
chunk now lives on the chip while it's
on the chip it's extremely fast to
operate on so if we have kernel Fusion
we can do all the operations right there
in an element-wise fashion and those are
very cheap and then we do a single round
trip back to the global memory so
operator Fusion basically allows you to
keep your chunk of data on the Chip And
do lots of calculations on it before you
write it back and that gives huge
savings and that's why torch compile
ends up being a lot faster or that's one
of the major
reasons uh so again just a very brief
intro to the memory hierarchy and
roughly what torch compile does for you
now torch compile is amazing but there
are operations torch compile will not
find and an amazing example of that is
Flash attention to which we turn next so
flash attention comes from this paper
from uh Stanford in
2022 and it's this incredible algorithm
for performing attention so um and
running it a lot faster so flash
attention will come here and we will
take out these four
lines and Flash attention implements
these four lines really really quickly
and how does it do that well flash
attention is a kernel Fusion operation
so you see here we have um in this
diagram they're showing P torch and you
have these four operations uh they're
including Dropout but we are not using
Dropout here so we just have these four
lines of code here and instead of those
we are fusing them into a single fused
kernel of flash attention so it's an
it's a it's a kernel Fusion algorithm
but it's a kernel Fusion that torch
compile cannot find
and the reason that it cannot find it is
that it um requires an algorithmic
rewrite of how attention is actually
implemented here in this case and what's
remarkable about it is that uh flash
attention actually if you just count the
number of flops flash attention does
more flops than this attention here but
flash attention is actually
significantly faster in fact they site
7. six times faster potentially and
that's because it is very mindful of the
memory hierarchy as I described it just
now and so it's very mindful about
what's in high bandwidth memory what's
in the shared memory and it is very
careful with how it orchestrates the
computation such that we have fewer
reads and writes to the high bandwidth
memory and so even though we're doing
more flops the expensive part is they
load and store into hbm and that's what
they avoid and so in particular they do
not ever materialize this end byend
attention Matrix this ATT here a flash
attention is designed such that this
Matrix never gets materialized at any
point and it never gets read or written
to the hbm and this is a very large
Matrix right so um because this is where
all the queries and keys interact and
we're sort of getting
um for each head for each batch element
we're getting a t BYT Matrix of
attention which is a Million numbers
even for a single head at a single batch
index at like so so basically this is a
ton of memory and and this is never
materialized and the way that this is
achieved is that basically the
fundamental algorithmic rewrite here
relies on this online softmax trick
which was proposed previously and I'll
show you the paper in a bit and the
online softmax trick coming from a
previous paper um shows how you can
incrementally evaluate a soft Max
without having to sort of realize all of
the inputs to the softmax to do the
normalization and you do that by having
these intermediate variables M and L and
there's an update to them that allows
you to evaluate the softmax in an online
manner um now flash attention actually
so recently flash attention 2 came out
as well so I have that paper up here as
well uh that has additional gains to how
it calculates flash attention and the
original paper that this is based on
basically is this online normalizer
calculation for softmax and remarkably
it came out of Nvidia and it came out of
it like really early 2018 so this is 4
years before flash attention
and this paper says that we propose a
way to compute the classical softmax
with fewer memory accesses and
hypothesize that this reduction in
memory accesses should improve softmax
performance on actual hardware and so
they are extremely correct in this
hypothesis but it's really fascinating
to me that they're from Nvidia and that
they had this realization but they
didn't actually take it to the actual
flash attention that had to come four
years later from Stanford so I don't
fully understand the historical how this
happened historically um but they do
basically propose this online update to
the softmax uh right here and this is
fundamentally what they reuse here to
calculate the softmax in a streaming
Manner and then they realize they can
actually fuse all the other operations
with the online sofx calculation into a
single fused kernel flash attention and
that's what we are about to use so great
example I think of being aware of um
memory hierarchy the fact that flops
don't matter uh the entire memory access
pattern matters and that torch compile
is amazing but there are many
optimizations that are still available
to us that potentially torch compile
cannot find maybe maybe one day it could
but right now it seems like a lot to ask
so here's what we're going to do we're
going to use Flash attention and the way
to do that basically in pytorch is we
are going to comment out these four
lines and we're going to replace them
with a single line and here we are
calling this compound operation in
pytorch called scale that product
attention and uh pytorch will call flash
attention when you use it in this way
I'm not actually 100% sure why torch
compile doesn't realize that these four
lines should just call flash attention
in this exact way we have to do it again
for it which in my opinion is a little
bit odd but um here we are so you have
to use this compound up and uh let's
wait for a few moments before torch comp
compile gets around to it and then let's
remember that we achieved 6.05 661 I
have it here that's the loss we were
expecting to see and we took 130
milliseconds uh before this change so
we're expecting to see the exact same
result by iteration 49 but we expect to
see faster runtime because Flash
attention is just a an algorithmic
rewrite and it's a faster kernel but it
doesn't actually change any of the
computation and we should have the exact
same optimization so okay so we're a lot
faster we're at about 95 milliseconds
and we achiev
6.58 okay so they're basically identical
up to a floating Point fudge Factor so
it's the identical computation but it's
significantly faster going from 130 to
roughly 90
96 and so this is um 96 divide
130ish so this is maybe 27 is%
Improvement um so uh really interesting
and that is Flash retention okay we are
now getting to one of my favorite
optimizations and it is simultaneously
the dumbest and the most brilliant
optimization and it's always a little
bit surprising to me um anyway so
basically I mentioned a few minutes ago
that there are some numbers that are
nice and some numbers that are ugly so
64 is a beautiful nice number 128 is
even nicer 256 is beautiful what makes
these numbers beautiful is that there
are many powers of two inside them you
can divide by two many times and uh
examples of ugly numbers are like 13 and
17 and something like that prime numbers
numbers that are not even and so on and
so pretty much you always want to use
nice numbers in all of your code that
deals with neural networks or Cuda
because everything in Cuda Works in sort
of like powers of two and lots of
kernels are written in terms of powers
of Two And there are lots of blocks of
sizes 16 and uh 64 and so on so
everything is written in those terms and
you always have special case handling
for all kinds of uh logic that U when
your inputs are not made of nice numbers
so let's see what that looks like
basically scan your code and look for
ugly numbers is roughly theistic so
three times is kind of ugly um I'm not
100% sure maybe this can be improved but
this is uh this is ugly and not
ideal um four times is nice so that's uh
that's nice
1024 is very nice that's a power of two
12 is a little bit suspicious um not too
many powers of two 768 is great 50, 257
is a really really ugly number um it's
first of all it's odd so uh and there's
no not too many powers of two in there
so this is a very ugly number and it's
highly suspicious and then when we
scroll down all these numbers are nice
and then here we have mostly nice
numbers except for 25 so in this
configuration of gpt2 XL a number of
heads is 25 uh that's a really ugly
number that's an odd number and um
actually this did cause a lot of
headaches for us recently when we're
trying to optimize some kernels uh to
run this fast um and required a bunch of
special case handling so basically these
numbers are we have some ugly numbers
and some of them are easier to fix than
others and in particular the voap size
being 50257 that's a very ugly number
very suspicious and we want to fix it
now when you when you fix these things
uh one of the easy ways to do that is
you basically um increase the number
until it's the nearest power of two that
you like so here's a much nicer number
it's
50304 and why is that because 50304 can
be divided by 8 or by 16 or by 32
64 it can even be divided by 128 I think
yeah so it's a very nice number um so
what we're going to do here is the GPT
config and you see that we initialized B
cap size to
50257 Let's override just
that um element to be
50304 okay so everything else stays the
same we're just increasing our
vocabulary size so we're adding it's
almost like we're adding fake tokens uh
so that book up size has powers of two
inside it now actually what I'm doing
here by the way is I'm increasing the
amount of computation that our network
will be doing if you just count the the
flops on like do the math of how many
flops we're doing we're going to be
doing more flops and we still have to
think through whether this doesn't break
anything but if I just run this uh let's
see what we get uh currently this ran in
maybe
96.5 milliseconds per step I'm just kind
of like eyeballing it and let's see what
kind of a result we're going to
get uh while this is compiling let's
think through whether our code actually
works okay when we increase the vocap
size like this let's look at where vocap
size is actually
used so we swing up to the inet and we
see that it's used inside the embedding
table of course so all the way at the
bottom of the Transformer and it's used
at the classifier layer all the way at
the top of the Transformer so in two
places and let's take a look and we're
running at 93 so 93 milliseconds instead
of
96.5 so we are seeing a roughly yeah 4%
Improvement here uh by doing more
calculations and the reason for this is
we fixed we've made an ugly number into
a nice number let's I'm going to come
into the explanation for that a little
bit again but for now let's just
convince ourselves that we're not
breaking anything when we do this so
first of all we've made the the wte the
embedding table for the tokens we've
made it larger it's almost like we
introduced more tokens at the bottom and
these tokens are never used because the
gbt tokenizer only has tokens up to
$50,000
256 and so we'll never index into the
rows that we've added so we're wasting a
little bit of space here by creating
memory that's never going to be accessed
never going to be used Etc now that's
not fully correct because this wte
weight ends up being shared and ends up
being used in the classifier here at the
end so what is that doing to the
classifier right here well what what
that's doing is we're predicting
additional Dimensions at the classifier
now and we're predicting probabilities
for tokens that will of course never be
present in the training set um and so
therefore the network has to learn that
these probabilities uh have to be driven
to zero and so the logits that the
network produces have to drive those
dimensions of the output to negative
Infinity but it that's no different from
all the other tokens that are already in
our data set um or rather that are not
in our data set so Shakespeare only
probably uses let's say a th000 tokens
out of 50,000 to 57 tokens so most of
the tokens are already being driven to
zero probability by the optimization we'
just introduced a few more tokens now
that in a similar manner will never be
used and have to be driven to zero in
probability um so functionally though
nothing breaks we're using a bit more
extra um memory but otherwise this is a
harmless operation as far as I can tell
but and we're adding calculation but
it's running faster and it's running
faster because as I mentioned in Cuda so
many kernels use uh block tiles and
these block towels are usually nice
numbers uh so powers of two so
calculations are done in like chunks of
64 or chunks of 32 and when your um when
your desired calculation doesn't neatly
fit into those block tiles um there are
all kinds of boundary kernels that can
kick in to like do the last part so
basically in a lot of kernels they will
chunk at up your input and they will do
the nice part first and then they have a
whole second second phase where they
come back to any that like uh remains uh
and then they process the remaining part
and the kernels for that could be very
inefficient and so you're basically um
spinning up all this extra compute and
is extremely inefficient so you might as
well pad your inputs and um make it fit
nicely and usually that empiric lens up
actually running faster um so this is
another example of a 4% Improvement that
we've added and this is something that
also torch compile did not find for us
you would hope that torch compile at
some point could figure an optimization
like this out uh but for now uh this is
it and I also have to point out that
we're using pytorch nightly so that's
why we're only seeing 4% if you're using
pytorch 2.3.1 or earlier you would
actually see something like 30%
Improvement just from this change from
changing it to from 50,000 to 57 to
50304 so again one of my favorite
examples also of having to understand
the under the hood and how it all works
and to know what kinds of things to
Tinker with to push the performance of
your code okay so at this point we have
improved the performance by about 11x
right because we started at about 1,000
milliseconds per step and we're now down
to like 93 milliseconds so that's uh
quite good and we're uh doing a much
better job of utilizing our GPU
resources so I'm going to now turn to
more algorithmic changes uh and
improvements to the actual optimization
itself and what we would like to do is
we would like to follow the hyper
parameters that are mentioned in the GP
G2 or gpt2 gpt3 paper now sadly gpt2 is
uh doesn't actually say too much it's
very nice of them that they released the
model weights and the code but the paper
itself is extremely vague as to the
optimization details uh the code itself
that they released as well the code
we've been looking at this is just the
inference code so there's no training
code here and very few hyp parameters so
this doesn't also tell us too much so
for that we have to turn to the gpt3
paper and um in the depending of the
gpt3 paper um they have a lot more hyper
parameters here for us to use and the
gpt3 paper in general is a lot more
detailed as to uh all of the you know
small details that go into the model
training but gpt3 U models were never
released so gbt2 we have the weights but
no details and gpt3 we have lots of
details but no weights so um but roughly
speaking gpt2 and gpt3 architectures are
very very similar and um basically there
are very few changes the context length
was expanded from 1024 to 2048 and
that's kind of like the major change uh
and some of the hyper parameters around
the Transformer have changed but
otherwise they're pretty much the same
model it's just that gpt3 was trained
for a lot longer on a bigger data set
and uh has a lot more thorough
evaluations uh and the gpt3 model is 175
billion instead of 1.6 billion um in the
gpt2 so long story short we're going to
go to gp3 paper to follow along some the
hyper parameters so to train all the
versions of gpt3 we use atom with beta 1
beta 2 of9 and .95 so let's swing over
here and make sure that the betas
parameter which you can see here
defaults to 0.9 and
999 is actually set to 0.9 and
.95 and then the Epsilon parameter uh
you can see is the default is 1 in8 and
this is also one in8 let's just uh put
it in so that works
expit uh now next up they say we clip
the gra Global Norm of the gradient at
1.0 so what this is referring to is that
once we calculate the gradients right
after l. backward um we basically have
the gradients at all the parameter
tensors and what people like to do is
basically uh clip them to have some kind
of a maximum Norm so in pytor this is
fairly easy to do uh it's one line of
code here that we have to insert right
after we calcul Cal the gradients and
what this utility function is doing is
um it's calculating the global Norm of
the parameters so every single par um
gradient on all the parameters you
square it and you add it all up and you
take a big square root of that and
that's the norm of the parameter V
Vector basically it's the it's the
length of it if you if you'd like to
look at it that way and we are basically
making sure that its length is no more
than 1.0 and we're going to clip it
and the reason that people like to use
this is that uh sometimes you can get
unlucky during your optimization maybe
it's a bad data batch or something like
that and if you get very unlucky in the
batch you might get really high loss and
really high loss could lead to a really
high gradient and this could basically
uh shock your model and shock the
optimization so people like to use a
gradient Norm clipping uh to prevent the
model from um basically getting too big
of shocks in terms of the gradient
magnet ude and uh the upper bound it in
this way it's a bit of a hacky solution
it's about like a patch on top of like
deeper issues uh but uh people still do
it fairly frequently now the clip grad
Norm Returns the norm of the gradient
which I like to always visualize uh
because um it is useful information and
sometimes you can look at the norm of
the gradient and if it's well behaved
things are good if it's climbing things
are bad and they're destabilizing during
training sometimes you could get a spike
in the norm and that means there's some
kind of an issue or an instability so
the norm here will be a
norm uh and let's do a uh 4f or
something like
that and I believe this is just a float
and so we should be able to uh print
that uh so that's Global gradient
clipping now they go into the details of
the learning rate uh scheduler so they
don't just use a fixed learning rate
like we do here for 3 E4 but there's
actually basically a cosine DK learning
rate schedule um it's got a warm-up and
it's got a cosine DEC to 10% over some
Horizon
um and so we're going to implement uh
this in a second I just like to see Norm
printed here okay there we go so what
happened here is the norm is actually
really high in the beginning 30 or so
and you see that as we continue training
it kind of like
stabilizes um at values below one um and
this is not that crazy uncommon for the
norm to be high in the very first few
stages basically What's Happening Here
is the model is completely random and so
there's a ton of learning happening very
early in the network but that learning
is kind of like um you know it's mostly
learning the biases of the output tokens
and so it's a bit of an unstable time uh
but the network usually stabilizes in a
very few iterations so this looks very
relatively reasonable to me except
usually I would expect this looks a
little bit funky that we go from 28 to 6
to 2 and then to 10 um it's not
completely insane but it's just kind of
a little bit
funky um okay so let's now get to the
learning rate schuer so the learning
rate schedule that's used here in gpt3
is what's called a cosine Decay learning
schedule with warmup and the way this
looks is that the learning rate is
basically starts right at around zero
linearly rank s up over some amount of
time and then comes down with this
cosine sort of form and comes down to
some kind of a minimum learning rate
that's up to you so here the minimum
learning rate is zero but uh here in the
paper they said that they use cosine
Decay for learning rate down to 10% of
its value over the first 260 billion
tokens and then training continues 10%
after and there's a linear warmup over
the first 375 million tokens so that's
about the learn R so let's now implement
this uh so I already implemented it here
and the way this works is let me scroll
down first here I changed our training
Loop a little bit so this was a 4i in
Max steps I just change it to step now
so that we have the notion of a step is
a single optimization step in the in the
for Loop and then here I get the LR for
this step of the optimization using a
new function I call get LR and then in
pytorch to set the learning rate I think
this is is the way to set the learning
rate it's a little bit gnarly um because
you have to basically there's a notion
of different par parameter groups that
could exist in the optimizer and so you
actually have to iterate over them even
though we currently have a single param
group only um and you have to set the LR
in this for Loop kind of style is is my
impression right now so we have this
look of LR we set the learning rate and
then on the bottom I'm also printing it
uh so that's all the changes I made to
this Loop and then of course the get LR
is my scheduler now it's worth pointing
out that pytorch actually has learning
rate schedulers and you can use them and
I believe there's a cosine learning rate
schedule in pytorch I just don't really
love using that code because honestly
it's like five lines of code and I fully
understand what's happening inside these
lines so I don't love to use
abstractions where they're kind of in
screwable and then I don't know what
they're doing so personal style so the
max learning rate here is let's say 3 E4
but we're going to see that in gpt3
here they have a table of what the
maximum learning rate is for every model
size so um for for this one basically 12
12 layer 768 gpt3 so the gpt3 small is
roughly like a GPT
2124m we see that here they use a
learning rate of 6 E4 so we could
actually go higher um in fact we may
want to try to follow that and just set
the max LR here at six
uh then the that's the maximum learning
rate the minum learning rate is uh 10%
of that per description in the paper
some number of steps that we're going to
warm up over and then the maximum steps
of the optimization which I now use also
in the for Loop down here and then you
can go over this code if you like it's
not U it's not terribly inside Flor
interesting I'm just uh modulating based
on the iteration number which learning
rate uh there should be so this is the
warm-up region um
this is the region after the
optimization and then this is the region
sort of in between and this is where I
calculate the cosine learning rate
schedule and you can step through this
in detail if you'd like uh but this is
basically implementing this
curve and I ran this already and this is
what that looks
like um so when we now run we start at
um some very low number now note that we
don't start exactly at zero because that
would be not useful to update with a
learning rate of zero that's why there's
an it+ one so that on the zeroth
iteration we are not using exactly zero
we're using something very very low then
we linearly warm up to maximum learning
rate which in this case was 34 when I
ran it but now would be 6 E4 and then it
starts to decay all the way down to um 3
E5 which was at the time 10% of the
original learning rate now one thing we
are not following exactly is that they
mentioned that um
let me see if I can find it
again we're not exactly following what
they did
because uh they mentioned that their
training Horizon is 300 billion tokens
and they come down to 10% of the initial
learning rate of at 260 billion and then
they train after 260 with 10% so
basically their Decay time is less than
the max steps time whereas for us
they're exactly equal so it's not
exactly faithful but it's um it's an
okay um this is okay for us and for our
purposes right now and um we're just
going to use this ourselves I don't
think it makes too too big of a
difference honestly I should point out
that what learning rate schedule you use
is totally up to you there's many
different types um coign learning rate
has been popularized a lot by gpt2 and
gpt3 but people have come up with all
kinds of uh other learning rate
schedules um and this is kind of like an
active area of uh research as to which
one is the most effective at train these
networks okay next up the paper talks
about the gradual batch size increase so
there's a ramp on the batch size that is
linear and you start with very small
batch size and you ramp up to a big
batch size over time uh we're going to
actually skip this and we're not going
to work with it and the reason I don't
love to use it is that it complicates a
lot of the arithmetic because you are
changing the number of tokens that
you're processing at every single step
of the optimization and I like to keep
that math very very simple also my
understanding is that that this is not
like a major um Improvement and also my
understanding is that this is not like
an algorithmic optimization Improvement
it's more of a systems and speed
Improvement and roughly speaking this is
because uh in the early stages of the
optimization uh again the model is in a
very atypical setting and mostly what
you're learning is that um you're mostly
learning to ignore the tokens uh that
don't come up in your training set very
often you're learning very simple biases
and and that kind of a thing and so
every single example that you put
through your network is basically just
telling you use these tokens and don't
use these tokens and so the gradients
from every single example are actually
extremely highly correlated they all
look roughly the same in the in the OR
original parts of the optimization
because they're all just telling you
that these tokens don't appear and these
tokens do appear and so because the
gradients are all very similar and
they're highly correlated then why are
you doing batch sizes of like Millions
when if you do a batch size of 32k
you're basically getting the exact same
gradient early on in the training and
then later in the optimization once
you've learned all the simple stuff
that's where the actual work starts and
that's where the gradients become more
decorrelated per examples and that's
where they actually offer you sort of
statistical power in some sense um so
we're going to skip this just because it
kind of complicates things and we're
going to go
to uh data are sampled without
replacement during training um so until
an Epoch boundary is reached so without
replacement means that they're not
sampling from some fixed pool and then
uh take a sequence train on it but then
also like return the sequence to the
pool they are exhausting a pool so when
they draw a sequence it's it's gone
until the next Epoch of training uh so
we're already doing that because our
data loader um iterates over chunks of
data so there's no replacement they
don't become eligible to be drawn again
until the next P so we're basically
already doing
that um all models use a weight decay of
0.1 to provide a small amount of
regularization so let's Implement a
weight Decay and you see here that I've
already kind of made the changes and in
particular instead of creating the
optimizer right here um I I'm creating a
new configure optimizers function inside
the model and I'm passing in some of the
hyper parameters instead so let's look
at the configure optimizers which is
supposed to return the optimizer
object okay so it looks complicated but
it's actually really simple and it's
just um we're just being very careful
and there's a few settings here to go
through the most important thing with
respect to this line is that you see
there's a weight Decay parameter here
and I'm passing that
into um well I'm passing that into
something called optim groups that
eventually ends up going into the addom
W Optimizer um and the weight Decay
that's by default used in Addam W here
is 0.01 so it's it's u 10 times lower
than what's used in gpt3 paper here um
so the weight dek basically ends up
making its way into the ADD and W
through the optimizer groups now what
else is going on here in this uh
function so the two things that are
happening here that are important is
that I'm splitting up the parameters
into those that should be weight decayed
and those that should not be weight
decayed so in particular it is common to
not weight decay uh biases and any other
sort of one-dimensional tensors so the
one-dimensional tensors are in the no
Decay prams and these are also things
like uh layer Norm scales and biases it
doesn't really make sense to weight
Decay those you mostly want to weight
Decay uh the weights that participate in
Matrix multiplications and you want to
potentially weight Decay the
embeddings and uh We've covered in
previous video why it makes sense to
Decay the weights because you can sort
of the it as a regularization because
when you're pulling down all the weights
you're forcing the optimization to use
more of the weights um and you're not
allowing any one of the weights
individually to be way too large um
you're forcing you're forcing the
network to kind of like distribute the
work across more channels because
there's sort of like a pull of gravity
on the weights
themselves um so that's why we are
separating it in those ways here we're
only decaying the embeddings and the
mmal participating ways
uh we're printing the number of uh
parameters that we decaying and not most
of the parameters will be decayed and
then one more thing that we're doing
here is I'm doing another optimization
here and previous add and W did not have
this option but later parts of pytorch
introduced it and that's why I'm
guarding it with an inspect do signature
which is basically checking if this
fused um quar is present inside atom W
and then if it is present I'm going to
end up using it and passing it in here
because some earlier versions do not
have fused equals so here's adamw fused
equals it did not used to exist and it
was added later and there's some docks
here for what's happening and basically
they say that by default they do not use
fused because it is relatively new and
we want to give it sufficient big time
so by default they don't use fused but
fused is a lot faster when it is
available and when you're running on
Cuda and what that does is in instead of
iterating in a for Loop over all the
parameter tensors and updating them that
would launch a lot of kernels right and
so a fused just means that it's a um all
those kernels are fused into a single
kernel you get rid of a lot of overhead
and you a single time on all the
parameters call a uh kernel that updates
them and so it's just basically a kernel
Fusion for the atom W update instead of
iterating over all the
tensors so that's the configure
optimizers function that I like to use
and we can rerun and we're not going to
see any major differences from what we
saw before but we are going to see some
prints uh coming from here so let's just
take a look at what they look
like so we see that number of Decay
tensors is 50 and it's most of the
parameters and number of non- deay
tensors is 98 and these are the biases
and the layer Norm parameters mostly and
that's there's only 100,000 of those so
most of it is decayed and then we are
using the fused implementation of ATM W
which will be a lot faster so if you
have it available I would advise you to
use it I'm not actually 100% sure why
they don't default to it it seems fairly
benign and
harmless and also because we are using
the fused implementation I think this is
why we have dropped um notice that the
running time used to be 93 milliseconds
per step and we're now down to 90
milliseconds per step because of using
the fused atom W Optimizer so in a
single commit here we are introducing
fused atom getting improvements on the
time and we're adding or changing the
weight Decay but we're only weight
decaying the two dimensional parameters
the embeddings and the matrices that
participate in linear so that is this
and we can take this out and uh yeah
that is it for this line one more quick
note before we continue here I just want
to point out that the relationship
between weight Decay learning rate batch
size the atom parameters beta 1 beta 2
the Epsilon and so on these are very
complicated uh mathematical
relationships in the optimization
literature and um for the most part I'm
in this video I'm just trying to copy
paste the settings that open AI used but
this is a complicated topic uh quite
deep and um yeah in this video I just
want to copy the parameters because it's
a whole different video to really talk
about that in detail and give it a
proper Justice instead of just high
level
intuitions uh now the next thing that I
want to move on to is that uh this
paragraph here by the way we're going to
turn back around to when we improve our
data loader for now I want to swing back
around
to this
table where you will notice that um for
different models we of course have
different U hyper parameters for the
Transformer that dictate the size of the
Transformer Network we also have a
different learning rate so we're seeing
the pattern that the bigger networks are
trained with slightly lower learning
rates and we also see this batch size
where in in the small networks they use
a smaller batch size and in the bigger
networks they use a bigger batch size
now the problem with for us is we can't
just use 0.5 million batch size because
uh if I just try to come in here and I
try to set uh this uh B where is my
b
um b
equals where where do I call the DAT
okay b equal 16 if I try to set um
well well we have to be careful it's not
0.5 million because this is the badge
size in the number of tokens every
single one of our rows is24 tokens so
0.5 E6 1 million divide 1024 this would
need about a
488 match size so the problem is I can't
come in here and set this to 488 uh
because my GPU would explode um this
would not fit for sure and so but we
still want to use this batch size
because again as I mentioned the batch
size is correlated with all the other
optimization hyper parameters and the
learning rates and so on so we want to
have a faithful representation of all
the hyper parameters and therefore we
need to uh use a bat size of .5 million
roughly but the question is how do we
use .5 million if we only have a small
GPU well for that we need to use what's
called gradient accumulation uh so we're
going to turn to that next and it allows
us to simulate in a Serial way any
arbitrary batch size that we set and so
we can do a batch size of .5 million we
just have to run longer and we have to
process multiple sequences and basically
add up all the gradients from them to
simulate a batch size of .5 million so
let's turn to that next okay so I
started the implementation right here
just by adding these lines of code and
basically what I did is first I set the
total batch size that we desire so this
is exactly .5 million and I used a nice
number a power of two uh because 2 to
the 19 is 524 288 so it's roughly .5
million it's a nice number now our micro
batch size as we call it now is 16 so
this is going to be we still have B BYT
in the SE that go into the Transformer
and do forward backward but we're not
going to do an update right we're going
to do many forward backwards we're going
to and those gradients are all going to
plus equals on the parameter gradients
they're all going to add up so we're
going to do forward backward grad akum
steps number of times and then we're
going to do a single update once all
that is
accumulated so in particular our micro
batch size is just now controlling how
many tokens how many rows we're
processing in a single go over a forward
backward so um here we are doing 16 *
124 we're doing 16
384 um tokens per forward backward and
we are supposed to be doing 2 to the 19
whoops what am I doing 2 to the
19 in total so the grat Aon will be
32 uh so therefore gr AUM here will work
out to 32 and we have to do 32 forward
backward um and then a single update now
we see that we have about 100
milliseconds for a singer forward
backward so doing 32 of them will be
will make every step roughly 3 seconds
just napkin
math so that's grum steps but now we
actually have to Implement that so we're
going to swing over to our training Loop
because now this part
here and this part here the forward and
the backward we have to now repeat this
32 times before we do everything else
that follows so let's uh see how we can
Implement that so let's come over here
and actually we do have to load a new
batch every single time so let me move
that over here and now this is where we
have the inner loop so for micro step in
range graum
steps we do this and remember that l.
backward always deposits gradients so
we're doing inside losta backward
there's always a plus equals on the
gradients so in every single L of
backward gradients will add up on the
gradient
tensors um so we lost that backward and
then we get all the gradients over there
and then we normalize and everything
else should just follow um so we're very
close but actually there's like subtle
and deep issue here and this is actually
incorrect so invite I invite you to
think about why this is not yet
sufficient um and uh let me fix it then
okay so I brought back the jupyter
notebook so we can think about this
carefully in a simple toy setting and
see what's happening so let's create a
very simple neural nut that takes a 16
Vector of 16 numbers and returns a
single
number and then here I'm creating some
random uh examples X and some targets uh
y Y and then we are using the mean
squared loss uh here to calculate the
loss so basically what this is is four
individual examples and we're just doing
Simple regression with the mean squared
loss over those four
examples now when we calculate the loss
and we lost that backward and look at
the gradient this is the gradient that
we
achieve now the loss objective here
notice that in MSE loss the default for
the loss function is reduction is mean
so we're we're calculating the average
mean loss um the the mean loss here over
the four examples so this is the exact
loss objective and this is the average
the one over four because there are four
independent examples here and then we
have the four examples and their mean
squared error the squared error and then
this makes it the mean squared error so
therefore uh we are we calculate the
squared error and then we normalize it
to make it the mean over the examples
and there's four examples here so now
when we come to the gradient
accumulation version of it this uh this
here is the gradient accumulation
version of it where we have grad acum
steps of four and I reset the gradient
we've grum steps of four and now I'm
evaluating all the examples individually
instead and calling L that backward on
them many times and then we're looking
at the gradient that we achieve from
that so basically now we forward our
function calculate the exact same loss
do a backward and we do that four times
and when we look at the gradient uh
you'll notice that the gradients don't
match so here we uh did a single batch
of four and here we did uh four gradient
accumulation steps of batch size one and
the gradients are not the same and
basically the the reason that they're
not the same is exactly because this
mean squared error gets lost this one
quarter in this loss gets lost because
what happens here is the loss of
objective for every one of the loops is
just a mean squ error um which in this
case because there's only a single
example is just this term here so that
was the loss in the zeroth eration same
in the first third and so on and then
when you do the loss. backward we're
accumulating gradients and what happens
is that accumulation in the gradient is
basically equivalent to doing a sum in
the
loss so our loss actually here is this
without the factor of one quarter
outside of it so we're missing the
normalizer and therefore our gradients
are off and so the way to fix this or
one of them is basically we can actually
come here and we can say loss equals
loss divide
4 and what happens now is that we're
introducing we're we're scaling our loss
we're introducing a one quarter in front
of all of these
places so all the individual losses are
now scaled by one quarter and and then
when we backward all of these accumulate
with a sum but now there's a one quarter
inside every one of these components and
now our losses will be
equivalent so when I run this you see
that the U gradients are now identical
so long story short with this simple
example uh when you step through it you
can see that basically the reason that
this is not correct is because in the
same way as here in the MSE loss the
loss that we're calculating here in the
model is using a reduction of mean as
well uh so where's the loss after that
cross
entropy and by default the reduction uh
here in Cross entropy is also I don't
know why they don't show it but it's the
mean uh the mean uh loss at all the B
BYT elements
right so there's a reduction by mean in
there and if we're just doing this
gradient accumulation here we're missing
that and so the way to fix this is to
simply compensate for the number of
gradient accumulation steps and we can
in the same way divide this loss so in
particular here the number of steps that
we're doing is loss equals loss divide
gradient accumulation steps so even uh
co-pilot s gets the modification but in
the same way exactly we are scaling down
the loss so that when we do loss that
backward which basically corresponds to
a sum in the objective we are summing up
the already
normalized um loss and and therefore
when we sum up the losses divided by
grum steps we are recovering the
additional normalizer uh and so now
these two will be now this will be
equivalent to the original uh sort of
optimization because the gradient will
come out the same okay so I had to do a
few more touch-ups and I launched
launched the optimization here so in
particular one thing we want to do
because we want to print things nicely
is well first of all we need to create
like an accumulator over the loss we
can't just print the loss because we'd
be printing only the final loss at the
final micro step so instead we have loss
ofon which I initialize at zero and then
I accumulate a uh the loss into it and
I'm using detach so that um uh I'm
detaching the tensor uh from the graph
and I'm just trying to keep track of the
values so I'm making these Leaf nodes
when I add them so that's lakum and then
we're printing that here instead of loss
and then in addition to that I had to
account for the grum steps inside the
tokens processed because now the tokens
processed per step is B * T * gradient
accumulation so long story short here we
have the optimization it looks uh
reasonable right we're starting at a
good spot we calculated the grum steps
to be
32 and uh we're getting about 3 seconds
here
right
um
and so this looks pretty good now if
you'd like to verify that uh your
optimization and the implementation here
is correct and your working on a side
well now because we have the total patch
size and the gradient accumulation steps
our setting of B is purely a performance
optimization kind of setting so if you
have a big GPU you can actually increase
this to 32 and you'll probably go a bit
faster if you have a very small GPU you
can try eight or four but in any case
you should be getting the exact same
optimization and the same answers up to
like a floating Point error because the
gradient accumulation kicks in and um
and can um handle everything serially as
an
Neary so uh that's it for gradient
accumulation I think okay so now is the
time to bring out the heavy weapons uh
you've noticed that so far we've only
been using a single GPU for training but
actually I am paying for eight gpus here
and so uh we should be putting all of
them to work and in particular they are
going to collaborate and uh you know
optimize over tokens at the same time
and communicate so that um uh they're
all kind of collaborating on the
optimization for this we are going to be
using the distributed data parallel from
pytorch there's also a legacy data
parallel which I recommend you not use
and that's kind of like you know Legacy
distributed data parallel Works in a
very simple way we have eight gpus so
we're going to uh launch eight processes
and each process is going to be assigned
to GPU and for each process the training
Loop and everything we've worked on so
far is going to look pretty much the
same H GPU as far as it's concerned is
just working on exactly what we've built
so far but now Secret L there's eight of
them and they're all going to be
processing slightly different parts of
the data and we're going to add one more
part where once they all calculate their
gradients there's one more part where we
do a average of those
gradients and so that's how they're
going to be collaborating on uh the
computational workload here so to use
all eight of them we're not going to be
launching our script anymore with just
um pytorch train
gbt2 piy we're going to be running it
with a special command called torrun in
pytorch we'll see that in a bit and
torrun uh when it runs our python script
we'll actually make sure to run eight
eight of them in parallel and it creates
these environmental variables where each
of these processes can look up which uh
basically which one of the processes it
is so for example torron will set rank
local Rank and World size environmental
variables and so this is a bad way to
detect whether uh DDP is running so if
we're using torch run if DDP is
running then uh we have to make sure
that K is available because I don't know
that you can run this on CPU anymore or
that that makes sense to do um this is
some um setup code here the important
part is that there's a world size which
for us will be eight that's the total
number of processes running there's a
rank which is um each process will
basically run the ex exact same code at
the exact same time roughly but all the
process the only difference between
these processes is that they all have a
different dtp rank so the um gpu0 will
have DDP rank of zero GPU 1 will have uh
rank of one Etc so otherwise they're all
running the exact same script it's just
that DDP rank will be a slightly
different integer and that is the way
for us to coordinate that they don't for
example run on the same data we want to
we want them to run on different parts
of the data and so on
now local rank is something that is only
used in a multi- node setting we only
have a single node with ag gpus and so
local rank is the rank of the GPU on a
single node so from 0 to seven as an
example but for us we're mostly going to
be running on a single box so the things
we care about are Rank and World size
this is eight and this will be whatever
it is depending on the GPU uh that uh
that this particular instantiation of
the script runs on
now here we make sure that according to
the local rank we are setting the device
to be Cuda colon and colon indicates
which GPU to use if there are more than
one gpus so depending on the local rank
of this process it's going to use just
the appropriate GPU so there's no
collisions on which GPU is being used by
which
process and finally there's a Boolean
variable that I like to create which is
the DDP rank equ equal Z so the master
process is arbitrarily process number
zero and it does a lot of the printing
logging checkpointing Etc and the other
processes are thought of mostly as a
compute processes that are assisting and
so Master process zero will have some
additional work to do all the other
processes will uh will mostly just be
doing forward
backwards and if we're not using DDP and
none of these variables are set we
revert back to single GPU training so
that means that we only have rank zero
the world size is just one uh and and we
are the master process and we try to
autodetect the device and this is world
as
normal so so far all we've done is we've
initialized
DDP and uh in the case where we're
running with torrun which we'll see in a
bit there's going to be eight copies
running in parallel each one of them
will have a different Rank and now we
have to make sure that everything
happens uh correctly afterwards so the
tricky thing with running multiple
processes is you always have to imagine
that there's going to be eight processes
running in parallel so as you read the
code now you have to imagine there's
eight you know eight python interpreters
running down these lines of code and the
only difference between them is that
they have a different DDP rank so they
all come here they all pick the exact
same seed they all make all of these
calculations completely unaware of the
other copies running roughly speaking
right so they all make the exact same
calculations and now we have to adjust
these calculations to take into account
that there's actually like a certain
world size and certain ranks so in
particular these micro batches and
sequence lengths these are all just per
GPU right so now there's going to be num
processes of them running in parallel so
we have to adjust this right because the
grum steps now is going to be total B
size divide B * T time U DDP R
size because each um process will will
do B * T and there's this many of
them and so in addition to that we we
want to make sure that this fits nicely
into total batch size which for us it
will because 16 * 124 * 8 8 gpus is
131 uh K and so
524288 this means that our gratum will
be four with the current settings right
so there's going to be 16 * 124 process
on each GPU and then there's a GP pus so
we're going to be doing
131,000 tokens in a single forward
backward on the 8
gpus so we want to make sure that this
fits nicely so that we can derive a nice
gradient accumulation
steps and uh yeah let's just adjust the
comments here times uh DDP World size
okay so each GPU calculates this now
this is where we start to get run into
issues right so we are each process is
going to come by a print and they're all
going to print so we're going to have
eight copies of these prints so one way
to deal with this is exactly this master
process variable that we have so if
Master process then guard this and
that's just so that we just print this a
single time because otherwise all the
processes would have computed the exact
same variables and there's no need to
print this eight
times um before getting into the data
loader and we're going to have to
refactor it obviously maybe at this
point is uh we should do some prints and
uh just take it out for a spin and exit
at this point so import
sis and S start exit and print IM
GPU um DDP
rank IM GPU DDP Rank and that um
print
by so uh so now let's try to run this
and just see how this works so let's
take it for a spin just so we see what
it looks like so normally we use to
launch python train gpd2 P like this now
we're going to run with torch run and
this is what it looks like so torch run
Standalone number of processes for
example is eight for us because we have
eight gpus uh and then change of2 Pi so
this is what the command would look like
and torch run again we'll run eight of
these so let's just see what happens so
first
it gets a little busy so there's a lot
going on here so first of all there's
some warnings from distributed and I
don't actually know that these mean
anything I think this is just like the
code is setting up and the processes are
coming online and we're seeing some
preliminary failure to collect while the
processes come up I'm not 100% sure
about that but we start to then get into
actual prints
so all the processes went down and then
the first print actually comes from
process 5 uh just by chance and then it
printed so process 5 basically got here
first it said I'm process on GPU 5 buy
and then this these prints come from the
master
process so process 5 just finished first
for whatever reason it just depends on
how the operating system scheduled the
processes to run uh then gpu0 ended then
GPU 3 and two and then uh probably
process 5 or something like that has uh
exited and and DDP really doesn't like
that because we didn't properly dispose
of uh the multi-gpus um setting and so
process group has not been destroyed
before we destruct uh so it really
doesn't like that and in an actual
application we would want to call
destroy process group uh so that we
clean up DDP properly and so it doesn't
like that too much and then the rest of
the gpus finish and that's it so
basically we can't guarantee when these
processes are running it's totally
but they are running in parallel we
don't want them to be printing um and
next up let's erase
this next up we want to make sure that
when we create data loader light we need
to now make it aware of this
multi-process um setting because we
don't want all the processes to be
loading the exact same data we want
every process to get its own chunk of
data so that they're all working on
different parts of the data set of
course so let's adjust that so one
particular particularly simple and a
naive way to do this is we have to make
sure that we pass in the rank and the
size to the data
loader and then when we come up here we
see that we now take Rank and processes
and we save them now the current
position will not be zero uh because
what we want is we want to stride out
all the processes so one way to do this
is we basically take S.B times salt. T
and then multiply it by the process
rank so proc process rank 0 will start
at zero but process rank one now starts
at B * T process rank two is starts at 2
* B * D Etc so that is the
initialization now we still they still
do this identically but now when we
advance we don't Advance by B * T we
advance by B * T times number of
processes right so basically um the
total number of tokens that we're um
consuming is B * T * number processes
and they all go off to a different Rank
and the position has to advance by the
entire
chunk and then here B * T time uh s. num
processes + one would be to exceed
number of tokens then we're going to
Loop and when we Loop we want to of
course Loop in the exact same way so we
sort of like reset back uh so this is
the simplest change that I can uh find
for kind of a very simple distributed
data Lo light and um you can notice that
if process rank is zero and non
processes is one then uh the whole thing
will be identical to what we had before
but now we can have actually multiple
processes uh running and this should
work
fine um so that's the data loader okay
so next up once they've all initialized
the data loader they come here and they
all create a GPT model uh so we create
eight GPT models on eight processes but
because the seeds are fixed here they
all create the same identical model they
all move it to the device of their Rank
and they all compile the model and
because the models are identical there
are eight identical compilations
happening in parallel but that's okay
now none of this uh changes because that
is on a per step basis and we're
currently working kind of within step
because we need to um just uh all the
all the changes we're making are kind of
like a within step
changes now the important thing here is
when we construct the M model we
actually have a bit of work to to do
here get loits is deprecated so uh
create
model we need to actually wrap the model
into the distributed data parallel
container so um this is how we wrap the
model into the DDP container and these
are the docs for DDP and they're quite
extensive and there's a lot of caveats
and a lot of things to be careful with
because everything complexifies times 10
when multiple processes are involved but
roughly speaking this device IDs I
believe has to be passed in now
unfortunately the docs for what device
IDs is is is extremely unclear uh so
when you actually like come here this
comment for what device IDs is is
roughly
nonsensical um but I'm pretty sure it's
supposed to be the DDP local rank so not
the DDP rank the local rank uh so this
is what you pass in here this wraps the
model and in particular what DDP does
for you is in a forward pass it actually
behaves identically so um my
understanding of it is nothing should be
changed in the forward pass but in the
backward pass as you are doing the
backward pass um in the simpl setting
once the backp passes over on each
independent GPU each independent GPU has
the gradient for all the parameters and
what DDP does for you is once the
backward pass is over it will call
what's called all reduce and it
basically does an average across all the
uh ranks of their gradients and and then
it will deposit that average on every
single rank so every sing Single rank
will end up with the average on it and
so basically that's the communication it
just synchronizes and averages the
gradients and that's what DDP offers you
now DDP actually is a little bit more um
it is a little bit more involved than
that because as you are doing the
backward pass through the layers of the
Transformer it actually can dispatch
Communications for the gradient while
the backward pass is still happening so
there's overlap of the uh communication
of the gradient and the synchronization
of them and uh the backward pass and uh
this is just more efficient and um uh to
do it that way so that's what DDP does
for you um forward is unchanged and
backward is mostly unchanged and we're
tacking on this average as we'll see in
a bit okay so now let's go to the uh
optimization nothing here changes let's
go to the optimization here the inner
loop and think through the
synchronization of uh these gradients in
the DP so basically by default what
happens as I mentioned is when you do l.
backward here it will do the backward
pass and then it will synchronize the
gradients um the problem here is because
of the gradient accumulation steps Loop
here we don't actually want to do the
synchronization after every single La
step backward because we are just
depositing gradients and we're doing
that serially and we just want them
adding up and we don't want to
synchronize every single time that would
be extremely wasteful so basically we
want to add them up and then on the the
very last uh it's only on the very last
step when micro when micro step becomes
gratak steps minus one only at that last
step do we want to actually do the
alberu uh to average up the gradients so
to do that we come here and um the
official sanctioned way by the way is to
do this no sync context manager so
pytorch says this is a context manager
to disable gradient synchronization
across DDP processes So within this
context gradient will be
accumulated and basically when you do no
sync there will be no communication so
they are telling us to do with DDP no
sync uh do the gradient accumulation
accumulate grats and then they are
asking us to do DDP again with another
input and that backward and I just
really don't love this I I just really
don't like it uh the fact that you have
to copy paste your code here and use a
context manager and this is just super
ugly so when I went to this source code
here you can see that when you enter
you simply toggle this variable this
require backward grat sync and this is
uh being toggled around and changed and
this is the variable that basically uh
if you step through it is being toggled
to determine if the gradient is going to
be synchronized so I actually just kind
of like to use that directly uh so
instead what I like to do is the
following right here before the L back
backward if we are using the DDP then um
then basically we only want to
synchronize we only want this variable
to be true when it is the final
iteration in all the other iterations
inside the micr steps we want to be
false so I just toggle it like this so
required backward graph sync should only
turn on when the micro step is the last
step and so I'm toggling this variable
directly and I hope that that impacts
last St backwards
and this is a naughty thing to do
because you know they could probably
change the DDP and this variable will go
away but for now I believe this this
works and it allows me to avoid the use
of context managers and code duplication
I'm just toggling the variable and then
Lop backward will not synchronize most
of the steps and it will synchronize the
very last step and so once this is over
uh and we come out every single um rank
will suddenly magically have the average
of all the gradients that were stored on
all the ranks so now we have to think
through whether that is what we want and
also um if this suffices and whether how
it works with the loss and what is loss
AUM so let's think through through that
now and the problem I'm getting at is
that we've averaged the gradients which
is great but the loss AUM has not been
impacted yet and the and this is outside
of the DDP container so that is not
being averaged um and so here when when
we are printing Los AUM well presumably
we're only going to be printing on the
master process uh rank zero and it's
just going to be printing the losses
that it saw on its process but instead
we want it to print the loss over all
the processes and the average of that
loss because we did average of gradients
so we want the average of loss as well
so simply here after this uh this is the
code that I've used in the past um and
instead of LF we want
Lum so if
DDP again then this is a p torch
distributed I import it where do I
import
it uh oh gosh so this file is starting
to get out of control huh so if uh so
import torch. distributed as dist
so dist.
ALU and we're doing the average on Lum
and so this lakum tensor exists on all
the ranks when we call all use of
average it creates the average of those
numbers and it deposits that average on
all the ranks so all the ranks after
this um call will now contain L AUM uh
averaged up and so when we print here on
the master process the L AUM is
identical in all the other ranks as well
so here if Master process
oops we want to print like this okay and
finally we have to be careful because
we're not processing even more tokens so
times DDP World size
that's number of tokens that we've
processed up
above
and everything else should be fine uh
the only other thing to be careful with
is as I mentioned you want to destroy
the process group so that we are nice to
nickel and it's not going to uh to uh to
DDP and it's not going to complain to us
uh when we exit
here so that should be it let's try to
take it for a spin okay so I launched
the script and it should be uh printing
here imminently we're now training with
8 gpus at the same time so the gradient
accumulation steps is not 32 it is now
divide 8 and it's just four uh so um
otherwise this is what the optimization
now looks like and wow we're going
really fast so we're processing 1.5
million tokens uh per second now so
these are some serious numbers and the
tiny shakespare data set is so tiny that
we're just doing like so many Epoch over
it most likely but this is roughly what
looks like um one thing that I had to
fix by the way is that this was model.
configure optimizers which Now doesn't
work because model now is a DDP model so
instead this has to become raw
model. configure optimizers where raw
model is something I create here so
right after I wrap the model into DDP uh
I have to create the raw model which in
the case of DDP is a model. module is
where it stores the raw and then module
of gpt2 as we have it which contains the
uh configure optimizers function that we
want to call so that's one thing that I
have to fix otherwise this seems to run
now one thing you'll notice is that when
you actually compare this run and the
numbers in it to the just running a
single GPU you'll notice that this is
single GPU run with 32 gratum the
numbers won't exactly match
up and uh that's kind of a boring reason
for why that happens uh the reason for
that is that in the data loader we're
basically just iterating through batches
and slightly different way because now
we're looking for an entire page of data
and if that page uh for all the gpus if
that chunk exceeds the number of tokens
we just Loop and so actually the single
GPU and the H GPU process will end up um
resetting in a slightly different Manner
and so our batches are slightly
different and so we get slightly
different numbers but one way to
convince yourself that this is okay it
just make the total batch size much
smaller and the b and a t and then um
so I think I used uh 4 * 124 * 8 so I
used 32768 as a total patch size and
then um so I made sure that the single
GPU will do eight creting accumulation
steps and then the multi-gpu and then
you're reducing the boundary effects of
the data loader and you'll see that the
numbers match up so long story short
we're now going really really fast the
optimization is mostly consistent with
gpt2 and three hyper parameters and uh
we have outgrown our tiny Shakespeare
file and we want to upgrade it so let's
move to next to that next so let's now
take a look at what data sets were used
by gpt2 and gpt3 so gbt2 used this web
Text data set that was never released um
there's an attempt at reproducing it
called open web text uh so basically
roughly speaking what they say here in
the paper is that they scraped all
outbound links from Reddit and then uh
with at least three Karma and that was
kind of like their starting point and
they collected all the web P all the web
pages and all the text in them and so
this was 45 million links and this ended
up being 40 GB of text so uh so that's
roughly what gpt2 says about its data
set so it's basically outbound links
from Reddit now when we go over to gpt3
there's a training data set section and
that's where they start to talk about um
common coll which is a lot more uh used
actually I think even gpt2 talked about
common coll um but basically it's not a
very high quality data set all by itself
because it is extremely noisy this is a
completely random subset of the internet
and it's much worse than you think so
people go into Great Lengths to filter
common craw because there's good stuff
in it but most of it is just like ad
spam random tables and numbers and stock
tickers and uh it's just total mess
so that's why people like to train on
these data mixtures that they curate and
uh are careful with so a large chunk of
these data mixtures typically will be
common C like for example 50% of the
tokens will be comic but then here in
gpt3 they're also using web text to from
before so that's Reddit outbound but
they're also adding for example books
and they're adding Wikipedia there's
many other things you can decide to add
now this data set for gpt3 was also
never released so today some of the data
sets that I'm familiar with that are
quite good and would be representative
of something along these lines are
number one the red pajama data set or
more specifically for example the slim
pajama subset of the red pajama data set
which is a cleaned and D duplicated
version of it and just to give you a
sense again it's a bunch of common crawl
um C4 which is also as far as I know
more common craw but processed
differently and then we have GitHub
books archive Wikipedia stack exchange
these are the kinds of data sets that
would go into these data mixtures now
specifically the one that I like that
came out recently is called Fine web
data set uh so this is an attempt to
basically collect really high quality
common coll data and filter it in this
case to 15 trillion tokens and then in
addition to that more recently
huggingface released this fine web edu
subset which is 1.3 trillion of
educational and 5.4 trillion of high
educational content so basically they're
trying to filter common C to very high
quality educational subsets and uh this
is the one that we will use there's a
long uh web page here on fine web and
they go into a ton of detail about how
they process the data which is really
fascinating reading by the way and I
would definitely recommend if you're
interested into Data mixtures and so on
and how data gets processed at these
scales a look at this uh page and more
specifically we'll be working with the
fine web edu I think and it's basically
educational content from the
internet uh they show that training on
educational content in in their metrics
um uh works really really well and we're
going to use this sample 10 billion
tokens subsample of it because we're not
going to be training on trillions of
tokens uh we're just going to train on
uh 10 billion sample of the fine web edu
because empirically in my previous few
experiments this actually suffices to
really get close to gpt2 Performance and
it's um simple enough to work with and
so let's work with the sample 10 uh BT
so our goal will be to download it
process it and make sure that our data
loader can work with it so let's get to
that okay so I introduced another um
file here that will basically download
Fine web edu from huging face data sets
it will pre-process and pre- tokenize
all of the data and it will save data
shards to a uh folder on um local disk
and so while this is running uh just
wanted to briefly mention that you can
kind of look through the data set viewer
here just to get a sense of what's in
here and it's kind of interesting I mean
it's a it basically looks like it's
working fairly well like it's talking
about nuclear energy in France it's
talking
about Mexican
America some mac PJs Etc so actually it
seems like their filters are working
pretty well uh the filters here by the
way were applied automatically using um
llama 370b I believe and so uh basically
llms are judging which content is
educational and that ends up making it
through the filter uh so that's pretty
cool now in terms of the script itself
I'm not going to go through the full
script because it's not as interesting
and not as llm Centric but when you run
this basically number one we're going to
load the data set uh which this is all
huging face code running this you're
going to need to uh pip install data
sets um so it's downloading the data set
then it is tokenizing all of the
documents inside this data set now when
we tokenize the documents you'll notice
that um to tokenize a single document uh
we first
start the tokens with the end of text
token and this is a special token in the
gpt2 tokenizer as you know so
50256 is the ID of the end of text and
this is what begins a document even
though it's called end of text but this
is uh the first token that begins a
document then we extend with all of the
tokens of that document then we create a
numpy array out of that we make sure
that all the tokens are between
oh okay let me debug this
okay so apologies for that uh it just
had to do with me using a float division
in Python it must be integer division so
that this is an INT and everything is
nice um okay but basically the
tokenization here is relatively
straightforward returns tokens in mp.
un6 uh we're using .16 to save a little
bit of space because 2 to the 16us 1 is
65,000 so the gpt2 max token ID is well
below that and then here there's a bunch
of multiprocessing code and it's
honestly not that exciting so I'm not
going to step through it but we're
loading the data set we're tokenizing it
and we're saving everything to shards
and the shards are numpy files uh so
just storing a numpy array and uh which
is very very similar to torch
tensors and the first Shard 0000 is a
Val a validation Shard and all the other
shards are uh training shards and as I
mentioned they all have 100 million
tokens in them exactly um and and that
just makes it easier to work with as to
Shard the files because if we just have
a single massive file sometimes they can
be hard to work with on the disk and so
sharting it is just kind of um nicer
from that
perspective and uh yeah so we'll just
let this run this will be probably um
30ish minutes or so and then we're going
to come back to actually train on this
data and we're going to be actually
doing some legit pre-training in this
case this is a good data set we're doing
lots of tokens per second we have 8 gpus
the code is ready and so we're actually
going to be doing a serious training run
so let's get P it back in a bit okay so
we're back so uh if we LS edu fine web
we see that there's now 100 charts in it
um and that makes sense because each
chart is 100 million tokens so 100
charts of that is 10 billion tokens in
total now swinging over to the main file
I made some adjustments to our data
loader again and that's because we're
not running with uh Shakespeare anymore
we want to use the fine web shards and
so you'll see some code here that
additionally basically can load these
shards uh we load the um un6 numpy file
we convert it to a torch. long tensor
which is what a lot of the layers up top
expect by default and then here we're
just enumerating all the shards I also
added a split to data load of light so
we can uh load the split train but also
the split Val uh the zero
split and then we can load the shards
and then here we also have not just the
current position now but also the
current Shard so we have a position
inside A Shard and then when we uh run
out of tokens in A Single Shard we first
Advance The Shard and loop if we need to
and then we get the tokens and readjust
the position so this data loader will
now iterate all the shards as well so I
Chang that and then the other thing that
I did while uh the data was processing
is our train loader now has split train
of course and down here I set up some I
set up some numbers
so we are doing 2 to the
9 uh tokens per uh per um per step and
we want to do roughly 10 billion tokens
um because that's how many unique tokens
we have so if we did 10 billion tokens
then divide that by 29 we see that this
is 1973 steps so that's where that's
from and then the GPT three paper says
that they warm up the learning rate over
375 million tokens so I came here and
375 E6 tokens divide uh 2 to the
19 is 715 steps so that's why warm-up
steps is set to 715 so this will exactly
match um the warm-up schedule that gpt3
used and I think 715 by the way is very
uh mild and this could be made
significantly more aggressive probably
even like 100 is good enough um
but it's okay let's leave it for now so
that we have the exact hyper parameters
of gpt3 so I fix that and then um that's
pretty much it we can we can run so we
have our script
here and we can
launch and actually sorry let me do one
more
thing excuse
me for my GPU I can actually fit more
batch size and I believe I can fat I can
fit 60 4 on my GPU as a micro bash size
so let me try
that I could be misremembering but that
means 64 * 124 per GPU and then we have
a gpus so that means we would not even
be doing gradient accumulation if this
fits because uh this just multi
multiplies out to uh the full total bat
size so no gradient
accumulation and that would run pretty
quickly if that fits
let's go let's go I mean if this works
then this is basically a serious
pre-training run um we're not logging
we're not evaluating the validation
split we're not running any evaluations
yet so it's not we haven't crossed our
te's and dotted our eyes but uh if we
let this run for a while we're going to
actually get a pretty good model and the
model that might even be on par with or
better than gpt2 124 M okay so it looks
like everything is going great we're
processing 1.5 million tokens per
second uh everything here looks good
we're doing 330 milliseconds per
iteration and we have to do a total
of uh where are we printing that 1973 so
19073 times 0.33
is this many seconds this many minutes
so this will run for 1.7
hours uh so one and a half hour run uh
like this and uh we don't even have to
use gradient accumulation which is nice
and you might not have that luxury in
your GPU in that case just start
decreasing the batch size until things
fit but keep it to nice
numbers um so that's pretty exciting
we're currently warming up the learning
rate so you see that it's still very low
one4 so this will ramp up over the next
few steps all the way to 6 e
Nega uh 4
here very cool so now what I'd like to
do is uh let's cross the T and do our
eyes let's evaluate on the validation
split and let's try to figure out how we
can run evals how we can do logging how
we can visualize our losses and all the
good stuff so let's get to that before
we actually do the run okay so I've
adjusted the code so that we're
evaluating on the validation split so
creating the Val loader just by passing
in Split equals Val that will basically
create a data loader just for the uh
validation
Shard um the other thing I did is in the
data loader I introduced a new function
reset which is called at init and it
basically resets the data loader and
that is very useful because when we come
to the main training Loop now so this is
the code that I've added and basically
every 100th iteration including the
zeroth iteration we put the model into
evaluation mode we reset the Val loader
and then um no gradients involved we're
going to
basically accumulate the gradients over
say 20 steps and then average it all up
and print out the validation loss and so
that basically is the exact same logic
as the training Loop roughly but there's
no loss that backward it's only
inference we're just measuring the loss
we're adding it up everything else
otherwise applies and is exactly as
we've seen it before and so this will
print the validation laws
um every 100th iteration including on
the very first
iteration uh so that's nice that will
tell us some amount some a little bit
about how much we're overfitting that
said like uh we have roughly Infinity
data so we're mostly expecting our train
and Val loss to be about the same but
the other reason I'm kind of interested
in this is because we can take the GPT
2124m as openi released it we can
initialize from it and we can basically
see what kind of loss it achieves on the
validation loss as well and that gives
us kind of an indication as to uh how
much that model would generalize to 124
M but it's not an sorry to fine web edu
validation split that said it's not a
super fair comparison to gpt2 because it
was trained on a very different data
distribution but it's still kind of like
an interesting data point and in any
case you would always want to have a
validation split in a training run like
this so that you can make sure that you
are not um overfitting and this is
especially a concern if we were to make
more Epoch in our training data um so
for example right now we're just doing a
single Epoch but if we get to a point
where we want to train on 10 epochs or
something like that we would be really
careful with maybe we are memorizing
that data too much if we have a big
enough model and our validation split
would be one way to tell whether that is
happening okay and in addition to that
if you remember at bottom of our script
we had all of this orphaned code for
sampling from way back when so I deleted
that code and I moved it up um to here
so once in a while we simply value
validation
once in a while we sample we generate
samples and then uh we do that only
every 100 steps and we train on every
single step so that's how I have a
structure right now and I've been
running this for 10,000 iterations so
here are some samples on neration
1,000
um hello I'm a language model and I'm
not able to get more
creative I'm a language model and
languages file you're learning about
here is or is the beginning of a
computer
okay so this is all like pretty uh this
is still a garble uh but we're only at
ration 1,000 and we've only just barely
reached maximum learning rate uh so this
is still learning uh we're about to get
some more samples coming up in
1,00 okay
um okay this is you know the model is
still is still a young baby okay so uh
basically all of this sampling code that
I've put here everything should be
familiar with to you and came from
before the only thing that I did is I
created a generator object in pytorch so
that I have a direct control over the
sampling of the random numbers don't
because I don't want to impact the RNG
state of the random number generator
that is the global one used for training
I want this to be completely outside of
the training Loop and so I'm using a
special sampling RNG and then I make
sure to seed it that every single rank
has a different seed and then I pass in
here where we sort of consumer in the
numbers in multinomial where the
sampling happens I make sure to pass in
the generator object there otherwise
this is identical uh now the other thing
is um you'll notice that we're running a
bit slower that's because I actually had
to disable torch. compile to get this to
sample and um so we're running a bit
slower so for some reason it works with
no torch compile but when I torch
compile my model I get a really scary
error from pytorch and I have no idea
how to resolve it right now so probably
by the time you see this code released
or something like that maybe it's fixed
but for now I'm just going to do end
false um and I'm going to bring back
toor compile and you're not going to get
samples and I I think I'll fix this
later uh by the way um I will be
releasing all this code and actually
I've been very careful about making get
commits every time we add something and
so I'm going to release the entire repo
that starts completely from scratch all
the way to uh now and after this as well
and so everything should be exactly
documented in the git commit history um
um and so I think that will be nice so
hopefully by the time you go to GitHub
uh this is removed and it's working and
I will have fixed the bug okay so I have
the optimization running here and it's
stepping and we're on step 6,000 or so
so we're about 30% through training now
while this is training I would like to
introduce one evaluation that we're
going to use to supplement the
validation set and that is the H swag
eval so hos swag comes from this paper
back in 2019 so it's a 5-year-old eval
now and the way H swag works is there is
basically a sentence completion data set
so it's a multiple choice for every one
of these questions we have uh basically
a shared context like a woman is outside
with a bucket and a dog the dog is
running around trying to avoid bath she
a Rises the bucket off with soap and
blow dry the dog's head B uses a hose to
keep it from getting soapy C gets the
dog wet and it runs away again or D gets
into a bathtub with the dog
and so basically the idea is that these
multiple choice are constructed so that
one of them is a natural continuation of
the um sentence and the others are
not and uh the others might not make
sense like uses the host to keep it from
getting soaped that makes no sense and
so what happens is that models that are
not trained very well are not able to
tell these apart but models that have a
lot of World Knowledge and can tell uh
which um and can tell a lot about the
world will be able to create these
completions and these sentences are
sourced from activity net and from Wiki
how and at the bottom of the uh
paper there's kind of like a cool chart
of the kinds of domains in Wiki house so
there's a lot of sentences from
computers and electronics and Homes and
Garden and it has kind of a broad
coverage of the kinds of things you need
to know about the world in order to find
the most likely completion and um the
identity of that of that completion one
more thing that's kind of interesting
about H swag is the way it was
constructed is that the incorrect um
options are deliberately um
adversarially sourced so they're not
just random sentences they're actually
sentences generated by language models
and they're generated in such a way that
language models basically find them
difficult but humans find them easy and
so they mentioned that humans have a 95%
accuracy on this set but at the time the
state-of-the-art language models had
only 48% and so at the time this was a
good Benchmark now you can read the
details of this paper to to learn more
um the thing to point out though is that
this is 5 years ago and since then what
happened to H swag is that it's been
totally just uh
um solved and so now the language models
here are 96% so basically the 4% the
last 4% is probably errors in the data
set or the questions are really really
hard and so basically this data set is
kind of crushed with respect to language
models but back then the best language
model was only at about 50% uh but this
is how far things got but still the the
reason people like H swag and it's not
used by the way in gpt2 but in gpt3
there is H swag eval and lots of people
use H
swag and so for gpt3 we have results
here
that are cited so we know what percent
accuracies gpt3 um attains at all these
different model checkpoints for H swag
eval and the reason people like it is
because H swag is a smooth eval and it
is an eval that offers quote unquote
early signal uh so early signal means
that even small language models are
going to start at the random chance of
25% but they're going to slowly improve
and you're going to see 25 26 27 Etc and
uh you can see slow Improvement even
when the models are very small and it's
very early so it's smooth it has early
signal and um it's been around for a
long time so that's why people kind of
like this
eval uh now the way that we're going to
evaluate this is as
follows as I mentioned we have a shared
context and this is kind of like a
multiple choice task but instead of
giving the model a multiple choice
question and asking it for A B C or D uh
we can't do that because these models
when they are so small as we are seeing
here the models can't actually do
multiple choice they don't understand
the concept of associating a label to
one of the options of multiple choice uh
they don't understand that so we have to
give it to them in a native form and the
native form is a token completion so
here's what we do we construct a batch
of four rows and uh T tokens whatever
that t happens to be then the shared
context that is basically the context
for the for choices the tokens of that
are shared across all of the rows and
then we have the four options so we kind
of like lay them out and then only one
of the options is correct in this case
label three option three and so um this
is the correct option and option one two
and for are
incorrect now these options might be of
different lengths so what we do is we
sort of like take the longest length and
that's the size of the batch B BYT and
then some of these uh here are going to
be pded Dimensions so they're going to
be unused and so we need the tokens we
need the correct label and we need a
mask that tells us which tokens are
active and the mask is then zero for
these uh padded areas so that's how we
construct these batches and then in
order to get the language model to
predict A B C or D the way this works is
basically we're just going to look at
the tokens their probabilities and we're
going to pick the option that gets the
lowest or the highest average
probability for the token so for the
tokens because that is the most likely
completion according to the language
model so we're just going to look at the
um probabilities here and average them
up across the options and pick the one
with the highest probability roughly
speaking so this is how we're going to
do H swag
um and this is I believe also how uh
gpt3 did it um this is how gpt3 did it
as far as I know but you should note
that some of the other evals where you
might see H swag may not do it this way
they may do it in a multiple choice
format where you sort of uh give the the
context a single time and then the four
completions and so the model is able to
see all the four options before it picks
the best possible option and that's
actually an easier task for a model
because you get to see the other options
when you're picking your choice um but
unfortunately models at our size can't
do that only models at a bigger size are
able to do that and so our models are
actually slightly handicapped in this
way that they are not going to see the
other options they're only going to see
one option at a time and they just have
to assign probabilities and the correct
option has to win out in this metric all
right so let's now implement this very
briefly and incorporate it into our
script okay so what I've done here is
I've introduced a new file called hell
swag. py that you can take a look into
and I'm not going to to step through all
of it because uh this is not exactly
like deep code deep code it's kind of
like a little bit tedious honestly
because what's happening is I'm
downloading hsac from GitHub and I'm
rendering all of its examples and there
are a total of 10,000 examples I am
rendering them into this format um and
so here at the end of this render
example function you can see that I'm
returning the
tokens uh the tokens of this um 4xt
uh array of Tokens The Mask which tells
us which parts are the options and
everything else is zero and the label
that is the correct label and so that
allows us to then iterate the examples
and render them and I have an evaluate
function here which can load a um gpt2
from huging face and it runs the eval
here um and it basically just calculates
uh just as I described it predicts the
option that has the lowest or the
highest prob ility and the way to do
that actually is we can basically
evaluate the cross entropy loss so we're
basically evaluating the loss of
predicting the next token in a sequence
and then we're looking at the row that
has the lowest average loss and that's
the uh option that we pick as the
prediction and then we do some stats and
prints and stuff like that so that is a
way to evaluate L swag now if you go up
here I'm showing that for GPT 2124m if
you run this script you're going to see
that H swag gets
29.5% um so that's the performance we
get here now remember that random Chan
is 25% so we haven't gone too far and
gpt2 XL which is the biggest the gpt2
gets all the way up to 49% roughly so uh
these are pretty low values considering
that today's state-ofthe-art is more
like 95% uh so these are definitely
older models by now and then there's one
more thing called Uther harness which is
a very piece of infrastructure for
running evals for language models and
they get slightly different numbers and
I'm not 100% sure what the discrepancy
is for these um it could be that they
actually do the multiple choice uh
instead of just the completions and that
could be the um uh the discrepancy but
I'm not 100% sure about that i' have to
take a look but for now our script
reports 2955 and so that is the number
that we'd like to beat if we are
training a GPD 2124m from scratch and
ourselves um
so now I'm going to go into actually
incorporating this eval into our main
training script and um and basically
because we want to evaluate it in a
periodic manner so that we can track H
swag and how it evolves over time and
see when when and if we cross uh this
2955 um sort of region so let's now walk
through some of the changes to train
gpt2 thatp the first thing I did here is
I actually made use compile optional
kind of and I disabled it by default and
the problem with that is the problem
with compile is that unfortunately it
does make our code faster but it
actually breaks the evaluation code and
the sampling code it gives me a very
gnarly message and I don't know why so
hopefully by the time you get to the
codebase when I put it up on GitHub uh
we're going to fix that by then but for
now I'm running without torch compile
which is why you see this be a bit
slower so we're running without torch
compile I also create cre a log
directory log where we can place our
log.txt which will record the train loss
validation loss and the H swag
accuracies so a very simple text file
and we're going to uh open for writing
so that it sort of starts empty and then
we're going to append to
it I created a simple variable that um
helps tell us when we have a last step
and then basically periodically inside
this Loop every 250th iteration or at
the last step we're going to evaluate
the validation loss and then every 250th
iteration um we are going to evaluate H
swag but only if we are not using
compile because compile breaks it so I'm
going to come back to this code for
evaluating H swag in a second and then
every 250th iteration as well we're also
going to sample from the model and so
you should recognize this as our ancient
code from way back when we started the
video and we're just sampling from the
model
and then finally here um these are if
we're not after we validate sample and
evaluate hell swag we actually do a
training step here and so this is one
step of uh training and you should be
pretty familiar with all of what this
does and at the end here once we get our
training laws we write it to the file so
the only thing that changed that I
really added is this entire section for
H swag eval and the way this works is
I'm trying to get all the gpus to
collaborate on the H swag and so we're
iterating all the examples and then each
process only picks the examples that
assigned to it so we sort of take I and
moded by the world size and we have to
make it equal to rank otherwise we
continue and then we render an example
put it on the GPU we get the low jits
then I create a helper function that
helps us basically predict the option
with the lowest loss so this comes here
the prediction and then if it's correct
we sort of keep count and then if
multiple processes were collaborating on
all this then we need to synchronize
their stats and so the way one way to do
that is to package up our statistics
here into tensors which we can then call
this. alberon and
sum and then here we sort of um unwrap
them from tensors so that we just have
ins and then here the master process
will print and log the hellis swag
accuracy
so that's kind of the that's kind of it
and that's what I'm running right here
so you see this optimization here and uh
we just had a generation and this is
Step 10,000 out of about 20,000 right so
we are halfway done and these are the
kinds of samples that uh we are getting
at this stage so let's take a look hello
I'm a language model so I'd like to use
it to generate some kinds of output
hello I'm a language model and I'm a
developer for a lot of
companies Al language
model uh let's see if I can find fun
one
um I don't know you can go through this
yourself but certainly the predictions
are getting less and less random uh it
seems like the model is a little bit
more self-aware and using language uh
that is a bit
more uh specific to it being language
model hello I'm a language model and
like how the language is used to
communicate I'm a language model and I'm
going to be speaking English and German
okay I don't know so let's just wait
until this optimization finishes and uh
we'll see what kind of samples we get
and we're also going to look at the
train Val and the hway accuracy and see
how we're doing with respect to
gpt2 okay good morning so focusing For a
Moment On The jupyter Notebook here on
the right I created a new cell that
basically allows us to visualize the the
train Val and Hela and um the hel score
and you can step through this it
basically like parses the log file that
we are writing and um a lot of this is
just like boring ma plot lip code but
basically this is what our optimization
looks like
so we ran for
19,731 billion tokens which is whoops oh
my gosh which is one Epoch of the sample
10B of webd on the left we have the loss
and the in blue we have the training
loss in Orange we have the validation
loss and red as a horizontal line we
have the opening IG gpt2 124 M model
checkpoint when it's just evaluated on
the validation set of um of this fine
web edu uh so you can see that we are
surpassing this orange is below the red
so we're surpassing the validation set
of this data set and like I mentioned
the data set distribution is very
different from what gpt2 trained on so
this is not an exactly fair comparison
but it's a good cross check uh to uh to
look at now we would ideally like
something that is withheld and
comparable and somewhat standard um and
so for us that is helis swag and so on
here we see the H swag progress we made
from 25% all the way here in red we see
the open gpt2 124 M model in red so it
achieves this h bag here and the the
gpt3 model 124 M which was trained on
300 billion tokens achieves green so
that's over here so you see that we
basically surpassed the gbt2 24m uh
model right here uh which is uh really
nice now interestingly we were able to
do so with only training on 10 billion
tokens while gpt2 was trained on 100
billion tokens so uh for some reason we
were able to get away with significantly
fewer tokens for training there are many
possibilities to as to why we could
match or surpass this accuracy um with
only 10 million training so number one
um it could be that opening gbt2 was
trained on a much wider data
distribution so in particular fine web
edu is all English it's not multilingual
and there's not that much math and code
um and so math and code and multilingual
could have been stealing capacity from
the original gpt2 model and um basically
that could be partially the reason why
uh this is not working out there's many
other reasons um so for example the H
swag eval is fairly old uh maybe 5 years
or so it is possible that aspects of H
swag in some way or even identically
have made it into the training Set uh of
fine web we don't know for sure but if
that was the case then we are basically
looking at the training curve instead of
the validation curve so long story short
this is not a perfect eval and there's
some caveats here uh but at least we
have some confidence that that we're not
doing something completely wrong and
um and uh it's probably the case that
when people try to create these data
sets they try to make sure that test
sets that are very common are not part
of the training set for example uh when
hugging face created the fine web BDU
they use H swag as an eval so I would
hope that they make sure that they D
duplicate and that there's no hella swag
in the training set but we can't be sure
uh the other thing I wanted to address
briefly is look at this loss curve this
looks really this looks really wrong
here I don't actually know 100% what
this is and I suspect it's because the
uh 10 billion sample of fine web edu was
not properly shuffled um and there's
some issue here uh with the data that I
don't fully understand yet and there's
some weird periodicity to it um and
because we are in a very lazy way sort
of serializing all the tokens and just
iterating all them from scratch without
doing any permutation or any random
sampling ourselves I think we're
inheriting some of the ordering that
they have in the data set so uh this is
not ideal but hopefully by the time you
get to this repo uh some of these things
by the way will hopefully be fixed and I
will release this build n GPT repo and
right now it looks a little ugly and
preliminary uh so hopefully by the time
you get here it's nicer but down here
I'm going to show aada and I'm going to
talk about about some of the things that
happened after the video and I expect
that we will have fixed uh the small
issue uh but for now basically this
shows that uh our training is not uh
completely wrong and it shows that uh
we're able to surpass the accuracy with
only 10x the token budget um and
possibly it could be also that the data
set may have improved so uh the original
uh gpt2 data set was web text it's
possible that not a lot of care and
attention went into the data set this
was very early in llms whereas now
there's a lot more scrutiny on good
practices around uh D duplication
filtering uh quality filtering and so on
and it's possible that the data that
we're training on is just of higher
quality per token and that could be
giving us a boost as well so a number of
cave has to think about but for now uh
we're pretty happy with this um and yeah
now the next thing I was interested in
is as you see it's a morning now so
there was an overnight and I wanted to
basically see how far I could push the
result so uh to do an overnight run I
basically did instead of one Epoch which
took roughly two hours I just did a
times four so that that would take eight
hours while I was sleeping and so we did
four Epoch or roughly 40 billion uh
tokens of training and I was trying to
see how far we could get um and so this
was the only change and I reran the
script and when I point uh and read the
log file at uh at the 40b uh this is
what the curve look
like okay so to narrate this number one
we are seeing this issue here here with
the periodicity through the different
Epoch and something really weird with
the fine web edu data set and that is to
be determined uh but otherwise we are
seeing that the H swag actually went up
by a lot and we almost we almost made it
uh to the GPT 324m accuracy uh up here
uh but not quite so uh it's too bad that
I didn't sleep slightly longer um and uh
I think if this was an uh five Epoch run
we may have gotten here now one thing to
point out is that if you're doing multi
Epoch runs uh we're not actually being
very careful in our data loader and
we're not um I this data loader goes
through the data in exactly the same
format and exactly the same order and
this is kind of suboptimal and you would
want to look into extensions where you
actually permute the data uh randomly
you permute the documents around in
Every Single Shard on every single new
Epoch um and po even permute the
shards and that would go a long way into
decreasing the pricity and it's also
better for the optimization so that
you're not seeing things ident in the
identical format and you're introducing
some of the some uh Randomness in how
the documents follow each other because
you have to remember that in every
single row these documents follow each
other and then there's the end of text
token and then the next document so the
documents are currently glued together
in the exact same identical manner but
we actually want to break break up the
documents and shuffle them around
because the order of the documents
shouldn't matter and they shouldn't um
basically we want to break up that
dependence because it's a kind of a
spous correlation and so our data lad is
not currently doing that and that's one
Improvement uh you could think of
making um the other thing to point out
is we're almost matching gpt3 accuracy
with only 40 billion tokens gpt3 trained
on 300 billion tokens so again we're
seeing about a 10x um Improvement here
with respect to learning efficiency uh
the other thing I wanted to and I don't
actually know exactly what to attribute
this to other than some of the things
that I already mentioned previously for
the previous run uh the other thing I
wanted to briefly mention is uh the max
LR here I saw some people already play
with this a little bit in a previous
related repository um and it turns out
that you can actually almost like three
xas so it's possible that the maximum
learning rate can be a lot higher and
for some reason the gpt3 hyper
parameters that we are inheriting are
actually extremely conservative and you
can actually get away with a Higher
Learning rate and it would train faster
so a lot of these hyper parameters um
are quite tunable and feel free to play
with them and they're probably not set
precisely correctly and um it's possible
that you can get away with doing this
basically and if you wanted to exactly
be faithful to gpt3 you would also want
to make the following difference you'd
want to come here and the sequence
length of gpt3 is 2x it's 20 48 instead
of 1,24 so you would come here change
this to 248 for T and then if you want
the exact same number of tokens uh half
a million per iteration or per step you
want to then decrease this to 32 so they
still multiply to half a mil so that
would give your model sequence length
equal to that of gpt3 and in that case
basically the
um the models would be roughly identical
as far as I'm as far as I'm aware
because again gpt2 and gpt3 are very
very similar models now we can also look
at some of the samples here from the
model that was trained overnight so this
is
the optimization and you see that here
we stepped all the way to
76290 also or so and these are the hos
mag we achieved was 33.2 4 and these are
some of the samples from the model and
you can see that if you read through
this and pause the video briefly you can
see that they are a lot more coherent uh
so
um and they're actually addressing the
fact that it's a language model almost
so uh hello I'm a language model and I
try to be as accurate as
possible um I'm a language model not a
programming
language I know how to communicate uh I
use
Python
um I don't know if you pause this and
look at it and then compare it to the
one to the model that was only trained
for 10 billion uh you will see that
these are a lot more coherent and you
can play with this uh
yourself one more thing I added to The
Code by the way is this chunk of code
here so basically right after we
evaluate the validation loss if we are
the master process in addition to
logging the validation loss every 5,000
steps we're also going to save the
checkpoint which is really just the
state dictionary of the model and so
checkpointing is nice just because uh
you can save the model and later you can
uh use it in some way if you wanted to
resume the optimiz ation then in
addition to saving the model we have to
also save the optimizer State dict
because remember that the optimizer has
a few additional buffers because of adom
so it's got the m and V and uh you need
to also resume the optimizer properly
you have to be careful with your RNG
seeds uh random number generators and so
on so if you wanted to exactly be able
to resume optimization you have to think
through the state of the of the training
process but if you just want to save the
model this is how you would do it and
one one nice reason why you might want
to do this is because you may want to
evaluate the model a lot more carefully
so here we are only kind of like winging
the hell swag eval but you may want to
use something um nicer like for example
the Luther uh Luther evaluation hardness
evaluation hardness hardness um so this
is a way to also evaluate language
models and um so it's possible that um
you may want to use basically different
infrastructure to more thoroughly
evaluate the models on different um
evaluations and compare it to the
opening gbt2 model on many other um
tasks like for example that involve math
code or different languages and so on so
this is a nice functionality to have as
well
um and then the other thing I wanted to
mention is that everything we've built
here this is only the pre-training step
so um the GPT here is a it dreams
documents it just predicts the next to
you can't talk to it like you can talk
to chat GPT uh chat GPT if you wanted to
talk to the model we have to fine-tune
it into the chat format and it's not
actually like that complicated if you're
looking at supervised fine-tuning or sft
really what that means is we're just
swapping out a data set into a data set
that is a lot more conversational and
there's a user assistant user assistant
kind of structure and we just fine-tune
on it and then we um we basically fill
in the user tokens and we sample the
assistant tokens it's not a lot more
deeper than that uh but basically we
swap out the data set and continue
training uh but for now we're going to
stop at uh pre-training one more thing
that I wanted to briefly show you is
that of course what we've built up today
was building towards nanog GPT which is
this repository from earlier uh but also
there's actually another nanog GPT
implementation and it's hiding in a more
recent project that I've been working on
called llm Doc and lm. C is a pure Cuda
implementation of gpt2 or gpt3 training
and it just directly uses uh Cuda and is
written as Cuda now the nanog gbt here
acts as reference code in pytorch to the
C implementation so we're trying to
exactly match up the two but we're
hoping that the C Cuda is faster and of
course currently that seems to be the
case um because it is a direct optimized
implementation so train gpt2 Pi in LL
M.C is basically the nanog GPT and when
you scroll through this file you'll find
a lot of things that very much look like
um things that we've built up in this
lecture and then when you look at train
gpt2 docu uh this is the C Cuda
implementation so there's a lot of MPI
nickel GPU Cuda
cc++ and you have to be familiar with
that but uh um when this is built up we
can actually run the two side by side
and they're going to produce the exact
same results but lm. C actually runs
faster so let's see that so on the left
I have pytorch a nanog GPT looking thing
on the right I have the llmc call and
here I'm going to launch the
two both of these are going to be
running on a single GPU and here I'm
putting the lm. C on GPU 1 and this one
will grab uh gpu0 by default and
then we can see here that lm. c
compiled and then allocate space and
it's
stepping so
basically uh meanwhile P torch is still
compiling because torch compile is a bit
slower here than the lm. C nbcc Cuda
compile and so this program has already
started running and uh we're still
waiting here for torch compile now of
course uh this is a very specific
implementation to gpt2 and 3 a pytorch
is a very general neural network
framework so they're not exactly
comparable but if you're only interested
in training gpt2 and 3 lm. C is very
fast it takes less space it's faster to
start and it's faster per
step and so P started to Stepping here
and as you can see we're running at
about 223,000 tokens per second here and
about 185,000 tokens per second here um
so quite a bit slower but I don't have
full confidence that I exactly squeezed
out all the juice from the pytorch
implementation but the important thing
here is notice that if I Aline up the
steps you will see that the losses and
Norms that are printed between these two
are
identical so on the left we have the pie
torch and on the right this C
implementation and they're the same
except this one runs faster uh so that's
kind of I wanted to show you also
briefly lm. C and this is a parallel
implementation and it's also something
that you may want to uh play with or
look at and um it's kind of interesting
okay so at this point I should probably
start wrapping up the video because I
think it's getting way longer than I
anticipated uh but we did Cover a lot of
ground and we built everything from
scratch so as a brief summary we were
looking at the gpt2 and GPT 3
papers we were looking at how you set up
these training runs uh and all the
considerations involved we wrote
everything from scratch and then we saw
that over the duration of either a
2-hour training run or an overnight run
we can actually match the 124 million
parameter checkpoints of gbt2 and gpt3
uh to a very large extent
um in principle the code that we wrote
would be able to train even bigger
models if you have the patients or the
Computing resources uh and so you could
potentially think about training some of
the bigger checkpoints as well um there
are a few remaining issues to address
what's happening with the loss here
which I suspect has to do with the fine
web edu data sampling uh why can't we
turn on Torch compile uh it currently
breaks generation and H swag what's up
with that in the data loader we should
probably be permuting our data when we
reach boundaries so there's a few more
issues like that and I expect to be
documenting some of those over time in
the uh build n GPT repository here which
I'm going to be releasing with this
video if you have any questions or like
to talk about anything that we covered
please go to discussions tab uh so we
can talk here uh or please go to issues
or pull request pull requests um
depending on what you'd like to
contribute or also have a look at the uh
Zero to Hero Discord and uh I'm going to
be hanging out here on N GPT
um otherwise for now I'm pretty happy
about where we got um and I hope you
enjoyed the video and I will see you
later